Section 1
Om! Having bowed down to Narayana and Nara, the most exalted male
being, and also to the goddess Saraswati, must the word Jaya be uttered.
Ugrasrava, the son of Lomaharshana, surnamed Sauti, well-versed in the
Puranas, bending with humility, one day approached the great sages of rigid
vows, sitting at their ease, who had attended the twelve years' sacrifice of
Saunaka, surnamed Kulapati, in the forest of Naimisha. Those ascetics,
wishing to hear his wonderful narrations, presently began to address him
who had thus arrived at that recluse abode of the inhabitants of the forest of
Naimisha. Having been entertained with due respect by those holy men, he
saluted those Munis (sages) with joined palms, even all of them, and
inquired about the progress of their asceticism. Then all the ascetics being
again seated, the son of Lomaharshana humbly occupied the seat that was
assigned to him. Seeing that he was comfortably seated, and recovered from
fatigue, one of the Rishis beginning the conversation, asked him, 'Whence
comest thou, O lotus-eyed Sauti, and where hast thou spent the time? Tell
me, who ask thee, in detail.'
Accomplished in speech, Sauti, thus questioned, gave in the midst of that
big assemblage of contemplative Munis a full and proper answer in words
consonant with their mode of life.
"Sauti said, 'Having heard the diverse sacred and wonderful stories which
were composed in his Mahabharata by Krishna-Dwaipayana, and which
were recited in full by Vaisampayana at the Snake-sacrifice of the high￾souled royal sage Janamejaya and in the presence also of that chief of
Princes, the son of Parikshit, and having wandered about, visiting many
sacred waters and holy shrines, I journeyed to the country venerated by the
Dwijas (twice-born) and called Samantapanchaka where formerly was
fought the battle between the children of Kuru and Pandu, and all the chiefs
of the land ranged on either side. Thence, anxious to see you, I am come
into your presence. Ye reverend sages, all of whom are to me as Brahma; ye
greatly blessed who shine in this place of sacrifice with the splendour of the
solar fire: ye who have concluded the silent meditations and have fed the
holy fire; and yet who are sitting--without care, what, O ye Dwijas (twice￾born), shall I repeat, shall I recount the sacred stories collected in the
Puranas containing precepts of religious duty and of worldly profit, or the
acts of illustrious saints and sovereigns of mankind?"
"The Rishi replied, 'The Purana, first promulgated by the great Rishi
Dwaipayana, and which after having been heard both by the gods and the
Brahmarshis was highly esteemed, being the most eminent narrative that
exists, diversified both in diction and division, possessing subtile meanings
logically combined, and gleaned from the Vedas, is a sacred work.
Composed in elegant language, it includeth the subjects of other books. It is
elucidated by other Shastras, and comprehendeth the sense of the four
Vedas. We are desirous of hearing that history also called Bharata, the holy
composition of the wonderful Vyasa, which dispelleth the fear of evil, just
as it was cheerfully recited by the Rishi Vaisampayana, under the direction
of Dwaipayana himself, at the snake-sacrifice of Raja Janamejaya?'
"Sauti then said, 'Having bowed down to the primordial being Isana, to
whom multitudes make offerings, and who is adored by the multitude; who
is the true incorruptible one, Brahma, perceptible, imperceptible, eternal;
who is both a non-existing and an existing-non-existing being; who is the
universe and also distinct from the existing and non-existing universe; who
is the creator of high and low; the ancient, exalted, inexhaustible one; who
is Vishnu, beneficent and the beneficence itself, worthy of all preference,
pure and immaculate; who is Hari, the ruler of the faculties, the guide of all
things moveable and immoveable; I will declare the sacred thoughts of the
illustrious sage Vyasa, of marvellous deeds and worshipped here by all.
Some bards have already published this history, some are now teaching it,
and others, in like manner, will hereafter promulgate it upon the earth. It is a
great source of knowledge, established throughout the three regions of the
world. It is possessed by the twice-born both in detailed and compendious
forms. It is the delight of the learned for being embellished with elegant
expressions, conversations human and divine, and a variety of poetical
measures.
In this world, when it was destitute of brightness and light, and enveloped
all around in total darkness, there came into being, as the primal cause of
creation, a mighty egg, the one inexhaustible seed of all created beings. It is
called Mahadivya, and was formed at the beginning of the Yuga, in which
we are told, was the true light Brahma, the eternal one, the wonderful and
inconceivable being present alike in all places; the invisible and subtile
cause, whose nature partaketh of entity and non-entity. From this egg came
out the lord Pitamaha Brahma, the one only Prajapati; with Suraguru and
Sthanu. Then appeared the twenty-one Prajapatis, viz., Manu, Vasishtha and
Parameshthi; ten Prachetas, Daksha, and the seven sons of Daksha. Then
appeared the man of inconceivable nature whom all the Rishis know and so
the Viswe-devas, the Adityas, the Vasus, and the twin Aswins; the Yakshas,
the Sadhyas, the Pisachas, the Guhyakas, and the Pitris. After these were
produced the wise and most holy Brahmarshis, and the numerous Rajarshis
distinguished by every noble quality. So the water, the heavens, the earth,
the air, the sky, the points of the heavens, the years, the seasons, the months,
the fortnights, called Pakshas, with day and night in due succession. And
thus were produced all things which are known to mankind.
And what is seen in the universe, whether animate or inanimate, of created
things, will at the end of the world, and after the expiration of the Yuga, be
again confounded. And, at the commencement of other Yugas, all things
will be renovated, and, like the various fruits of the earth, succeed each
other in the due order of their seasons. Thus continueth perpetually to
revolve in the world, without beginning and without end, this wheel which
causeth the destruction of all things.
The generation of Devas, in brief, was thirty-three thousand, thirty-three
hundred and thirty-three. The sons of Div were Brihadbhanu, Chakshus,
Atma Vibhavasu, Savita, Richika, Arka, Bhanu, Asavaha, and Ravi. Of
these Vivaswans of old, Mahya was the youngest whose son was Deva￾vrata. The latter had for his son, Su-vrata who, we learn, had three sons,--
Dasa-jyoti, Sata-jyoti, and Sahasra-jyoti, each of them producing numerous
offspring. The illustrious Dasa-jyoti had ten thousand, Sata-jyoti ten times
that number, and Sahasra-jyoti ten times the number of Sata-jyoti's
offspring. From these are descended the family of the Kurus, of the Yadus,
and of Bharata; the family of Yayati and of Ikshwaku; also of all the
Rajarshis. Numerous also were the generations produced, and very
abundant were the creatures and their places of abode. The mystery which
is threefold--the Vedas, Yoga, and Vijnana Dharma, Artha, and Kama--also
various books upon the subject of Dharma, Artha, and Kama; also rules for
the conduct of mankind; also histories and discourses with various srutis; all
of which having been seen by the Rishi Vyasa are here in due order
mentioned as a specimen of the book.
The Rishi Vyasa published this mass of knowledge in both a detailed and an
abridged form. It is the wish of the learned in the world to possess the
details and the abridgement. Some read the Bharata beginning with the
initial mantra (invocation), others with the story of Astika, others with
Uparichara, while some Brahmanas study the whole. Men of learning
display their various knowledge of the institutes in commenting on the
composition. Some are skilful in explaining it, while others, in
remembering its contents.
The son of Satyavati having, by penance and meditation, analysed the
eternal Veda, afterwards composed this holy history, when that learned
Brahmarshi of strict vows, the noble Dwaipayana Vyasa, offspring of
Parasara, had finished this greatest of narrations, he began to consider how
he might teach it to his disciples. And the possessor of the six attributes,
Brahma, the world's preceptor, knowing of the anxiety of the Rishi
Dwaipayana, came in person to the place where the latter was, for
gratifying the saint, and benefiting the people. And when Vyasa, surrounded
by all the tribes of Munis, saw him, he was surprised; and, standing with
joined palms, he bowed and ordered a seat to be brought. And Vyasa having
gone round him who is called Hiranyagarbha seated on that distinguished
seat stood near it; and being commanded by Brahma Parameshthi, he sat
down near the seat, full of affection and smiling in joy. Then the greatly
glorious Vyasa, addressing Brahma Parameshthi, said, "O divine Brahma,
by me a poem hath been composed which is greatly respected. The mystery
of the Veda, and what other subjects have been explained by me; the
various rituals of the Upanishads with the Angas; the compilation of the
Puranas and history formed by me and named after the three divisions of
time, past, present, and future; the determination of the nature of decay,
fear, disease, existence, and non-existence, a description of creeds and of
the various modes of life; rule for the four castes, and the import of all the
Puranas; an account of asceticism and of the duties of a religious student;
the dimensions of the sun and moon, the planets, constellations, and stars,
together with the duration of the four ages; the Rik, Sama and Yajur Vedas;
also the Adhyatma; the sciences called Nyaya, Orthœphy and Treatment of
diseases; charity and Pasupatadharma; birth celestial and human, for
particular purposes; also a description of places of pilgrimage and other
holy places of rivers, mountains, forests, the ocean, of heavenly cities and
the kalpas; the art of war; the different kinds of nations and languages: the
nature of the manners of the people; and the all-pervading spirit;--all these
have been represented. But, after all, no writer of this work is to be found
on earth.'
"Brahma said. 'I esteem thee for thy knowledge of divine mysteries, before
the whole body of celebrated Munis distinguished for the sanctity of their
lives. I know thou hast revealed the divine word, even from its first
utterance, in the language of truth. Thou hast called thy present work a
poem, wherefore it shall be a poem. There shall be no poets whose works
may equal the descriptions of this poem, even, as the three other modes
called Asrama are ever unequal in merit to the domestic Asrama. Let
Ganesa be thought of, O Muni, for the purpose of writing the poem.'
"Sauti said, 'Brahma having thus spoken to Vyasa, retired to his own abode.
Then Vyasa began to call to mind Ganesa. And Ganesa, obviator of
obstacles, ready to fulfil the desires of his votaries, was no sooner thought
of, than he repaired to the place where Vyasa was seated. And when he had
been saluted, and was seated, Vyasa addressed him thus, 'O guide of the
Ganas! be thou the writer of the Bharata which I have formed in my
imagination, and which I am about to repeat."
"Ganesa, upon hearing this address, thus answered, 'I will become the writer
of thy work, provided my pen do not for a moment cease writing." And
Vyasa said unto that divinity, 'Wherever there be anything thou dost not
comprehend, cease to continue writing.' Ganesa having signified his assent,
by repeating the word Om! proceeded to write; and Vyasa began; and by
way of diversion, he knit the knots of composition exceeding close; by
doing which, he dictated this work according to his engagement.
I am (continued Sauti) acquainted with eight thousand and eight hundred
verses, and so is Suka, and perhaps Sanjaya. From the mysteriousness of
their meaning, O Muni, no one is able, to this day, to penetrate those closely
knit difficult slokas. Even the omniscient Ganesa took a moment to
consider; while Vyasa, however, continued to compose other verses in great
abundance.
The wisdom of this work, like unto an instrument of applying collyrium,
hath opened the eyes of the inquisitive world blinded by the darkness of
ignorance. As the sun dispelleth the darkness, so doth the Bharata by its
discourses on religion, profit, pleasure and final release, dispel the
ignorance of men. As the full-moon by its mild light expandeth the buds of
the water-lily, so this Purana, by exposing the light of the Sruti hath
expanded the human intellect. By the lamp of history, which destroyeth the
darkness of ignorance, the whole mansion of nature is properly and
completely illuminated.
This work is a tree, of which the chapter of contents is the seed; the
divisions called Pauloma and Astika are the root; the part called Sambhava
is the trunk; the books called Sabha and Aranya are the roosting perches;
the books called Arani is the knitting knots; the books called Virata and
Udyoga the pith; the book named Bhishma, the main branch; the book
called Drona, the leaves; the book called Karna, the fair flowers; the book
named Salya, their sweet smell; the books entitled Stri and Aishika, the
refreshing shade; the book called Santi, the mighty fruit; the book called
Aswamedha, the immortal sap; the denominated Asramavasika, the spot
where it groweth; and the book called Mausala, is an epitome of the Vedas
and held in great respect by the virtuous Brahmanas. The tree of the
Bharata, inexhaustible to mankind as the clouds, shall be as a source of
livelihood to all distinguished poets."
"Sauti continued, 'I will now speak of the undying flowery and fruitful
productions of this tree, possessed of pure and pleasant taste, and not to be
destroyed even by the immortals. Formerly, the spirited and virtuous
Krishna-Dwaipayana, by the injunctions of Bhishma, the wise son of Ganga
and of his own mother, became the father of three boys who were like the
three fires by the two wives of Vichitra-virya; and having thus raised up
Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura, he returned to his recluse abode to
prosecute his religious exercise.
It was not till after these were born, grown up, and departed on the supreme
journey, that the great Rishi Vyasa published the Bharata in this region of
mankind; when being solicited by Janamejaya and thousands of Brahmanas,
he instructed his disciple Vaisampayana, who was seated near him; and he,
sitting together with the Sadasyas, recited the Bharata, during the intervals
of the ceremonies of the sacrifice, being repeatedly urged to proceed.
Vyasa hath fully represented the greatness of the house of Kuru, the
virtuous principles of Gandhari, the wisdom of Vidura, and the constancy of
Kunti. The noble Rishi hath also described the divinity of Vasudeva, the
rectitude of the sons of Pandu, and the evil practices of the sons and
partisans of Dhritarashtra.
Vyasa executed the compilation of the Bharata, exclusive of the episodes
originally in twenty-four thousand verses; and so much only is called by the
learned as the Bharata. Afterwards, he composed an epitome in one hundred
and fifty verses, consisting of the introduction with the chapter of contents.
This he first taught to his son Suka; and afterwards he gave it to others of
his disciples who were possessed of the same qualifications. After that he
executed another compilation, consisting of six hundred thousand verses.
Of those, thirty hundred thousand are known in the world of the Devas;
fifteen hundred thousand in the world of the Pitris: fourteen hundred
thousand among the Gandharvas, and one hundred thousand in the regions
of mankind. Narada recited them to the Devas, Devala to the Pitris, and
Suka published them to the Gandharvas, Yakshas, and Rakshasas: and in
this world they were recited by Vaisampayana, one of the disciples of
Vyasa, a man of just principles and the first among all those acquainted with
the Vedas. Know that I, Sauti, have also repeated one hundred thousand
verses.
Yudhishthira is a vast tree, formed of religion and virtue; Arjuna is its trunk;
Bhimasena, its branches; the two sons of Madri are its full-grown fruit and
flowers; and its roots are Krishna, Brahma, and the Brahmanas.
Pandu, after having subdued many countries by his wisdom and prowess,
took up his abode with the Munis in a certain forest as a sportsman, where
he brought upon himself a very severe misfortune for having killed a stag
coupling with its mate, which served as a warning for the conduct of the
princes of his house as long as they lived. Their mothers, in order that the
ordinances of the law might be fulfilled, admitted as substitutes to their
embraces the gods Dharma, Vayu, Sakra, and the divinities the twin
Aswins. And when their offspring grew up, under the care of their two
mothers, in the society of ascetics, in the midst of sacred groves and holy
recluse-abodes of religious men, they were conducted by Rishis into the
presence of Dhritarashtra and his sons, following as students in the habit of
Brahmacharis, having their hair tied in knots on their heads. 'These our
pupils', said they, 'are as your sons, your brothers, and your friends; they are
Pandavas.' Saying this, the Munis disappeared.
When the Kauravas saw them introduced as the sons of Pandu, the
distinguished class of citizens shouted exceedingly for joy. Some, however,
said, they were not the sons of Pandu; others said, they were; while a few
asked how they could be his offspring, seeing he had been so long dead.
Still on all sides voices were heard crying, 'They are on all accounts
welcome! Through divine Providence we behold the family of Pandu! Let
their welcome be proclaimed!' As these acclamations ceased, the plaudits of
invisible spirits, causing every point of the heavens to resound, were
tremendous. There were showers of sweet-scented flowers, and the sound
of shells and kettle-drums. Such were the wonders that happened on the
arrival of the young princes. The joyful noise of all the citizens, in
expression of their satisfaction on the occasion, was so great that it reached
the very heavens in magnifying plaudits.
Having studied the whole of the Vedas and sundry other shastras, the
Pandavas resided there, respected by all and without apprehension from any
one.
The principal men were pleased with the purity of Yudhishthira, the courage
of Arjuna, the submissive attention of Kunti to her superiors, and the
humility of the twins, Nakula and Sahadeva; and all the people rejoiced in
their heroic virtues.
After a while, Arjuna obtained the virgin Krishna at the swayamvara, in the
midst of a concourse of Rajas, by performing a very difficult feat of
archery. And from this time he became very much respected in this world
among all bowmen; and in fields of battle also, like the sun, he was hard to
behold by foe-men. And having vanquished all the neighbouring princes
and every considerable tribe, he accomplished all that was necessary for the
Raja (his eldest brother) to perform the great sacrifice called Rajasuya.
Yudhishthira, after having, through the wise counsels of Vasudeva and by
the valour of Bhimasena and Arjuna, slain Jarasandha (the king of
Magadha) and the proud Chaidya, acquired the right to perform the grand
sacrifice of Rajasuya abounding in provisions and offering and fraught with
transcendent merits. And Duryodhana came to this sacrifice; and when he
beheld the vast wealth of the Pandavas scattered all around, the offerings,
the precious stones, gold and jewels; the wealth in cows, elephants, and
horses; the curious textures, garments, and mantles; the precious shawls and
furs and carpets made of the skin of the Ranku; he was filled with envy and
became exceedingly displeased. And when he beheld the hall of assembly
elegantly constructed by Maya (the Asura architect) after the fashion of a
celestial court, he was inflamed with rage. And having started in confusion
at certain architectural deceptions within this building, he was derided by
Bhimasena in the presence of Vasudeva, like one of mean descent.
And it was represented to Dhritarashtra that his son, while partaking of
various objects of enjoyment and diverse precious things, was becoming
meagre, wan, and pale. And Dhritarashtra, some time after, out of affection
for his son, gave his consent to their playing (with the Pandavas) at dice.
And Vasudeva coming to know of this, became exceedingly wroth. And
being dissatisfied, he did nothing to prevent the disputes, but overlooked the
gaming and sundry other horried unjustifiable transactions arising
therefrom: and in spite of Vidura, Bhishma, Drona, and Kripa, the son of
Saradwan, he made the Kshatriyas kill each other in the terrific war that
ensued.'
"And Dhritarashtra hearing the ill news of the success of the Pandavas and
recollecting the resolutions of Duryodhana, Kama, and Sakuni, pondered
for a while and addressed to Sanjaya the following speech:--
'Attend, O Sanjaya, to all I am about to say, and it will not become thee to
treat me with contempt. Thou art well-versed in the shastras, intelligent and
endowed with wisdom. My inclination was never to war, not did I delight in
the destruction of my race. I made no distinction between my own children
and the children of Pandu. My own sons were prone to wilfulness and
despised me because I am old. Blind as I am, because of my miserable
plight and through paternal affection, I bore it all. I was foolish alter the
thoughtless Duryodhana ever growing in folly. Having been a spectator of
the riches of the mighty sons of Pandu, my son was derided for his
awkwardness while ascending the hall. Unable to bear it all and unable
himself to overcome the sons of Pandu in the field, and though a soldier,
unwilling yet to obtain good fortune by his own exertion, with the help of
the king of Gandhara he concerted an unfair game at dice.
'Hear, O Sanjaya, all that happened thereupon and came to my knowledge.
And when thou hast heard all I say, recollecting everything as it fell out,
thou shall then know me for one with a prophetic eye. When I heard that
Arjuna, having bent the bow, had pierced the curious mark and brought it
down to the ground, and bore away in triumph the maiden Krishna, in the
sight of the assembled princes, then, O Sanjaya I had no hope of success.
When I heard that Subhadra of the race of Madhu had, after forcible seizure
been married by Arjuna in the city of Dwaraka, and that the two heroes of
the race of Vrishni (Krishna and Balarama the brothers of Subhadra)
without resenting it had entered Indraprastha as friends, then, O Sanjaya, I
had no hope of success. When I heard that Arjuna, by his celestial arrow
preventing the downpour by Indra the king of the gods, had gratified Agni
by making over to him the forest of Khandava, then, O Sanjaya, I had no
hope of success. When I heard that the five Pandavas with their mother
Kunti had escaped from the house of lac, and that Vidura was engaged in
the accomplishment of their designs, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. When I heard that Arjuna, after having pierced the mark in the
arena had won Draupadi, and that the brave Panchalas had joined the
Pandavas, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that
Jarasandha, the foremost of the royal line of Magadha, and blazing in the
midst of the Kshatriyas, had been slain by Bhima with his bare arms alone,
then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that in their
general campaign the sons of Pandu had conquered the chiefs of the land
and performed the grand sacrifice of the Rajasuya, then, O Sanjaya, I had
no hope of success. When I heard that Draupadi, her voice choked with
tears and heart full of agony, in the season of impurity and with but one
raiment on, had been dragged into court and though she had protectors, she
had been treated as if she had none, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. When I heard that the wicked wretch Duhsasana, was striving to
strip her of that single garment, had only drawn from her person a large
heap of cloth without being able to arrive at its end, then, O Sanjaya, I had
no hope of success. When I heard that Yudhishthira, beaten by Saubala at
the game of dice and deprived of his kingdom as a consequence thereof,
had still been attended upon by his brothers of incomparable prowess, then,
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that the virtuous
Pandavas weeping with affliction had followed their elder brother to the
wilderness and exerted themselves variously for the mitigation of his
discomforts, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
'When I heard that Yudhishthira had been followed into the wilderness by
Snatakas and noble-minded Brahmanas who live upon alms, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Arjuna, having, in
combat, pleased the god of gods, Tryambaka (the three-eyed) in the
disguise of a hunter, obtained the great weapon Pasupata, then O Sanjaya, I
had no hope of success. When I heard that the just and renowned Arjuna
after having been to the celestial regions, had there obtained celestial
weapons from Indra himself then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
When I heard that afterwards Arjuna had vanquished the Kalakeyas and the
Paulomas proud with the boon they had obtained and which had rendered
them invulnerable even to the celestials, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. When I heard that Arjuna, the chastiser of enemies, having gone to
the regions of Indra for the destruction of the Asuras, had returned thence
successful, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that
Bhima and the other sons of Pritha (Kunti) accompanied by Vaisravana had
arrived at that country which is inaccessible to man then, O Sanjaya, I had
no hope of success. When I heard that my sons, guided by the counsels of
Karna, while on their journey of Ghoshayatra, had been taken prisoners by
the Gandharvas and were set free by Arjuna, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope
of success. When I heard that Dharma (the god of justice) having come
under the form of a Yaksha had proposed certain questions to Yudhishthira
then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that my sons had
failed to discover the Pandavas under their disguise while residing with
Draupadi in the dominions of Virata, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. When I heard that the principal men of my side had all been
vanquished by the noble Arjuna with a single chariot while residing in the
dominions of Virata, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I
heard that Vasudeva of the race of Madhu, who covered this whole earth by
one foot, was heartily interested in the welfare of the Pandavas, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that the king of Matsya,
had offered his virtuous daughter Uttara to Arjuna and that Arjuna had
accepted her for his son, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I
heard that Yudhishthira, beaten at dice, deprived of wealth, exiled and
separated from his connections, had assembled yet an army of seven
Akshauhinis, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard
Narada, declare that Krishna and Arjuna were Nara and Narayana and he
(Narada) had seen them together in the regions of Brahma, then, O Sanjaya,
I had no hope of success. When I heard that Krishna, anxious to bring about
peace, for the welfare of mankind had repaired to the Kurus, and went away
without having been able to effect his purpose, then, O Sanjaya, I had no
hope of success. When I heard that Kama and Duryodhana resolved upon
imprisoning Krishna displayed in himself the whole universe, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. Then I heard that at the time of his
departure, Pritha (Kunti) standing, full of sorrow, near his chariot received
consolation from Krishna, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When
I heard that Vasudeva and Bhishma the son of Santanu were the counsellors
of the Pandavas and Drona the son of Bharadwaja pronounced blessings on
them, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When Kama said unto
Bhishma--I will not fight when thou art fighting--and, quitting the army,
went away, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that
Vasudeva and Arjuna and the bow Gandiva of immeasurable prowess, these
three of dreadful energy had come together, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope
of success. When I heard that upon Arjuna having been seized with
compunction on his chariot and ready to sink, Krishna showed him all the
worlds within his body, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I
heard that Bhishma, the desolator of foes, killing ten thousand charioteers
every day in the field of battle, had not slain any amongst the Pandavas
then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Bhishma, the
righteous son of Ganga, had himself indicated the means of his defeat in the
field of battle and that the same were accomplished by the Pandavas with
joyfulness, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that
Arjuna, having placed Sikhandin before himself in his chariot, had
wounded Bhishma of infinite courage and invincible in battle, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that the aged hero
Bhishma, having reduced the numbers of the race of shomaka to a few,
overcome with various wounds was lying on a bed of arrows, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that upon Bhishma's lying
on the ground with thirst for water, Arjuna, being requested, had pierced the
ground and allayed his thirst, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
When Bayu together with Indra and Suryya united as allies for the success
of the sons of Kunti, and the beasts of prey (by their inauspicious presence)
were putting us in fear, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When the
wonderful warrior Drona, displaying various modes of fight in the field, did
not slay any of the superior Pandavas, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. When I heard that the Maharatha Sansaptakas of our army
appointed for the overthrow of Arjuna were all slain by Arjuna himself,
then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that our
disposition of forces, impenetrable by others, and defended by Bharadwaja
himself well-armed, had been singly forced and entered by the brave son of
Subhadra, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that our
Maharathas, unable to overcome Arjuna, with jubilant faces after having
jointly surrounded and slain the boy Abhimanyu, then, O Sanjaya, I had no
hope of success. When I heard that the blind Kauravas were shouting for
joy after having slain Abhimanyu and that thereupon Arjuna in anger made
his celebrated speech referring to Saindhava, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope
of success. When I heard that Arjuna had vowed the death of Saindhava and
fulfilled his vow in the presence of his enemies, then, O Sanjaya, I had no
hope of success. When I heard that upon the horses of Arjuna being
fatigued, Vasudeva releasing them made them drink water and bringing
them back and reharnessing them continued to guide them as before, then,
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that while his horses
were fatigued, Arjuna staying in his chariot checked all his assailants, then,
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Yuyudhana of the
race of Vrishni, after having thrown into confusion the army of Drona
rendered unbearable in prowess owing to the presence of elephants, retired
to where Krishna and Arjuna were, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. When I heard that Karna even though he had got Bhima within his
power allowed him to escape after only addressing him in contemptuous
terms and dragging him with the end of his bow, then, O Sanjaya, I had no
hope of success. When I heard that Drona, Kritavarma, Kripa, Karna, the
son of Drona, and the valiant king of Madra (Salya) suffered Saindhava to
be slain, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that the
celestial Sakti given by Indra (to Karna) was by Madhava's machinations
caused to be hurled upon Rakshasa Ghatotkacha of frightful countenance,
then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that in the
encounter between Karna and Ghatotkacha, that Sakti was hurled against
Ghatotkacha by Karna, the same which was certainly to have slain Arjuna
in battle, then, O Sanjaya. I had no hope of success. When I heard that
Dhristadyumna, transgressing the laws of battle, slew Drona while alone in
his chariot and resolved on death, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. When I heard that Nakula. the son of Madri, having in the presence
of the whole army engaged in single combat with the son of Drona and
showing himself equal to him drove his chariot in circles around, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When upon the death of Drona, his son
misused the weapon called Narayana but failed to achieve the destruction of
the Pandavas, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that
Bhimasena drank the blood of his brother Duhsasana in the field of battle
without anybody being able to prevent him, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope
of success. When I heard that the infinitely brave Karna, invincible in
battle, was slain by Arjuna in that war of brothers mysterious even to the
gods, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that
Yudhishthira, the Just, overcame the heroic son of Drona, Duhsasana, and
the fierce Kritavarman, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I
heard that the brave king of Madra who ever dared Krishna in battle was
slain by Yudhishthira, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I
heard that the wicked Suvala of magic power, the root of the gaming and
the feud, was slain in battle by Sahadeva, the son of Pandu, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Duryodhana, spent
with fatigue, having gone to a lake and made a refuge for himself within its
waters, was lying there alone, his strength gone and without a chariot, then,
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that the Pandavas
having gone to that lake accompanied by Vasudeva and standing on its
beach began to address contemptuously my son who was incapable of
putting up with affronts, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I
heard that while, displaying in circles a variety of curious modes (of attack
and defence) in an encounter with clubs, he was unfairly slain according to
the counsels of Krishna, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I
heard the son of Drona and others by slaying the Panchalas and the sons of
Draupadi in their sleep, perpetrated a horrible and infamous deed, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Aswatthaman while
being pursued by Bhimasena had discharged the first of weapons called
Aishika, by which the embryo in the womb (of Uttara) was wounded, then,
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that the weapon
Brahmashira (discharged by Aswatthaman) was repelled by Arjuna with
another weapon over which he had pronounced the word "Sasti" and that
Aswatthaman had to give up the jewel-like excrescence on his head, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that upon the embryo in
the womb of Virata's daughter being wounded by Aswatthaman with a
mighty weapon, Dwaipayana and Krishna pronounced curses on him, then,
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
'Alas! Gandhari, destitute of children, grand-children, parents, brothers, and
kindred, is to be pitied. Difficult is the task that hath been performed by the
Pandavas: by them hath a kingdom been recovered without a rival.
'Alas! I have heard that the war hath left only ten alive: three of our side,
and the Pandavas, seven, in that dreadful conflict eighteen Akshauhinis of
Kshatriyas have been slain! All around me is utter darkness, and a fit of
swoon assaileth me: consciousness leaves me, O Suta, and my mind is
distracted."
"Sauti said, 'Dhritarashtra, bewailing his fate in these words, was overcome
with extreme anguish and for a time deprived of sense; but being revived,
he addressed Sanjaya in the following words.
"After what hath come to pass, O Sanjaya, I wish to put an end to my life
without delay; I do not find the least advantage in cherishing it any longer."
"Sauti said, 'The wise son of Gavalgana (Sanjaya) then addressed the
distressed lord of Earth while thus talking and bewailing, sighing like a
serpent and repeatedly tainting, in words of deep import.
"Thou hast heard, O Raja, of the greatly powerful men of vast exertions,
spoken of by Vyasa and the wise Narada; men born of great royal families,
resplendent with worthy qualities, versed in the science of celestial arms,
and in glory emblems of Indra; men who having conquered the world by
justice and performed sacrifices with fit offerings (to the Brahmanas),
obtained renown in this world and at last succumbed to the sway of time.
Such were Saivya; the valiant Maharatha; Srinjaya, great amongst
conquerors. Suhotra; Rantideva, and Kakshivanta, great in glory; Valhika,
Damana, Saryati, Ajita, and Nala; Viswamitra the destroyer of foes;
Amvarisha, great in strength; Marutta, Manu, Ikshaku, Gaya, and Bharata;
Rama the son of Dasaratha; Sasavindu, and Bhagiratha; Kritavirya, the
greatly fortunate, and Janamejaya too; and Yayati of good deeds who
performed sacrifices, being assisted therein by the celestials themselves,
and by whose sacrificial altars and stakes this earth with her habited and
uninhabited regions hath been marked all over. These twenty-four Rajas
were formerly spoken of by the celestial Rishi Narada unto Saivya when
much afflicted for the loss of his children. Besides these, other Rajas had
gone before, still more powerful than they, mighty charioteers noble in
mind, and resplendent with every worthy quality. These were Puru, Kuru,
Yadu, Sura and Viswasrawa of great glory; Anuha, Yuvanaswu, Kakutstha,
Vikrami, and Raghu; Vijava, Virihorta, Anga, Bhava, Sweta, and
Vripadguru; Usinara, Sata-ratha, Kanka, Duliduha, and Druma;
Dambhodbhava, Para, Vena, Sagara, Sankriti, and Nimi; Ajeya, Parasu,
Pundra, Sambhu, and holy Deva-Vridha; Devahuya, Supratika, and Vrihad￾ratha; Mahatsaha, Vinitatma, Sukratu, and Nala, the king of the Nishadas;
Satyavrata, Santabhaya, Sumitra, and the chief Subala; Janujangha,
Anaranya, Arka, Priyabhritya, Chuchi-vrata, Balabandhu, Nirmardda,
Ketusringa, and Brhidbala; Dhrishtaketu, Brihatketu, Driptaketu, and
Niramaya; Abikshit, Chapala, Dhurta, Kritbandhu, and Dridhe-shudhi;
Mahapurana-sambhavya, Pratyanga, Paraha and Sruti. These, O chief, and
other Rajas, we hear enumerated by hundreds and by thousands, and still
others by millions, princes of great power and wisdom, quitting very
abundant enjoyments met death as thy sons have done! Their heavenly
deeds, valour, and generosity, their magnanimity, faith, truth, purity,
simplicity and mercy, are published to the world in the records of former
times by sacred bards of great learning. Though endued with every noble
virtue, these have yielded up their lives. Thy sons were malevolent,
inflamed with passion, avaricious, and of very evil-disposition. Thou art
versed in the Sastras, O Bharata, and art intelligent and wise; they never
sink under misfortunes whose understandings are guided by the Sastras.
Thou art acquainted, O prince, with the lenity and severity of fate; this
anxiety therefore for the safety of thy children is unbecoming. Moreover, it
behoveth thee not to grieve for that which must happen: for who can avert,
by his wisdom, the decrees of fate? No one can leave the way marked out
for him by Providence. Existence and non-existence, pleasure and pain all
have Time for their root. Time createth all things and Time destroyeth all
creatures. It is Time that burneth creatures and it is Time that extinguisheth
the fire. All states, the good and the evil, in the three worlds, are caused by
Time. Time cutteth short all things and createth them anew. Time alone is
awake when all things are asleep: indeed, Time is incapable of being
overcome. Time passeth over all things without being retarded. Knowing,
as thou dost, that all things past and future and all that exist at the present
moment, are the offspring of Time, it behoveth thee not to throw away thy
reason.'
"Sauti said, 'The son of Gavalgana having in this manner administered
comfort to the royal Dhritarashtra overwhelmed with grief for his sons, then
restored his mind to peace. Taking these facts for his subject, Dwaipayana
composed a holy Upanishad that has been published to the world by learned
and sacred bards in the Puranas composed by them.
"The study of the Bharata is an act of piety. He that readeth even one foot,
with belief, hath his sins entirely purged away. Herein Devas, Devarshis,
and immaculate Brahmarshis of good deeds, have been spoken of; and
likewise Yakshas and great Uragas (Nagas). Herein also hath been
described the eternal Vasudeva possessing the six attributes. He is the true
and just, the pure and holy, the eternal Brahma, the supreme soul, the true
constant light, whose divine deeds wise and learned recount; from whom
hath proceeded the non-existent and existent-non-existent universe with
principles of generation and progression, and birth, death and re-birth. That
also hath been treated of which is called Adhyatma (the superintending
spirit of nature) that partaketh of the attributes of the five elements. That
also hath been described who is purusha being above such epithets as
'undisplayed' and the like; also that which the foremost yatis exempt from
the common destiny and endued with the power of meditation and Tapas
behold dwelling in their hearts as a reflected image in the mirror.
"The man of faith, devoted to piety, and constant in the exercise of virtue,
on reading this section is freed from sin. The believer that constantly
heareth recited this section of the Bharata, called the Introduction, from the
beginning, falleth not into difficulties. The man repeating any part of the
introduction in the two twilights is during such act freed from the sins
contracted during the day or the night. This section, the body of the
Bharata, is truth and nectar. As butter is in curd, Brahmana among bipeds,
the Aranyaka among the Vedas, and nectar among medicines; as the sea is
eminent among receptacles of water, and the cow among quadrupeds; as are
these (among the things mentioned) so is the Bharata said to be among
histories.
"He that causeth it, even a single foot thereof, to be recited to Brahmanas
during a Sradha, his offerings of food and drink to the manes of his
ancestors become inexhaustible.
"By the aid of history and the Puranas, the Veda may be expounded; but the
Veda is afraid of one of little information lest he should it. The learned man
who recites to other this Veda of Vyasa reapeth advantage. It may without
doubt destroy even the sin of killing the embryo and the like. He that
readeth this holy chapter of the moon, readeth the whole of the Bharata, I
ween. The man who with reverence daily listeneth to this sacred work
acquireth long life and renown and ascendeth to heaven.
"In former days, having placed the four Vedas on one side and the Bharata
on the other, these were weighed in the balance by the celestials assembled
for that purpose. And as the latter weighed heavier than the four Vedas with
their mysteries, from that period it hath been called in the world
Mahabharata (the great Bharata). Being esteemed superior both in
substance and gravity of import it is denominated Mahabharata on account
of such substance and gravity of import. He that knoweth its meaning is
saved from all his sins.
'Tapa is innocent, study is harmless, the ordinance of the Vedas prescribed
for all the tribes are harmless, the acquisition of wealth by exertion is
harmless; but when they are abused in their practices it is then that they
become sources of evil.'"
*****
Section 2
"The Rishis said, 'O son of Suta, we wish to hear a full and circumstantial
account of the place mentioned by you as Samanta-panchaya.'
"Sauti said, 'Listen, O ye Brahmanas, to the sacred descriptions I utter O ye
best of men, ye deserve to hear of the place known as Samanta-panchaka. In
the interval between the Treta and Dwapara Yugas, Rama (the son of
Jamadagni) great among all who have borne arms, urged by impatience of
wrongs, repeatedly smote the noble race of Kshatriyas. And when that fiery
meteor, by his own valour, annihilated the entire tribe of the Kshatriyas, he
formed at Samanta-panchaka five lakes of blood. We are told that his reason
being overpowered by anger he offered oblations of blood to the manes of
his ancestors, standing in the midst of the sanguine waters of those lakes. It
was then that his forefathers of whom Richika was the first having arrived
there addressed him thus, 'O Rama, O blessed Rama, O offspring of Bhrigu,
we have been gratified with the reverence thou hast shown for thy ancestors
and with thy valour, O mighty one! Blessings be upon thee. O thou
illustrious one, ask the boon that thou mayst desire.'
"Rama said, 'If, O fathers, ye are favourably disposed towards me, the boon
I ask is that I may be absolved from the sins born of my having annihilated
the Kshatriyas in anger, and that the lakes I have formed may become
famous in the world as holy shrines.' The Pitris then said, 'So shall it be. But
be thou pacified.' And Rama was pacified accordingly. The region that lieth
near unto those lakes of gory water, from that time hath been celebrated as
Samanta-panchaka the holy. The wise have declared that every country
should be distinguished by a name significant of some circumstance which
may have rendered it famous. In the interval between the Dwapara and the
Kali Yugas there happened at Samanta-panchaka the encounter between the
armies of the Kauravas and the Pandavas. In that holy region, without
ruggedness of any kind, were assembled eighteen Akshauhinis of soldiers
eager for battle. And, O Brahmanas, having come thereto, they were all
slain on the spot. Thus the name of that region, O Brahmanas, hath been
explained, and the country described to you as a sacred and delightful one. I
have mentioned the whole of what relateth to it as the region is celebrated
throughout the three worlds.'
"The Rishis said, 'We have a desire to know, O son of Suta, what is implied
by the term Akshauhini that hath been used by thee. Tell us in full what is
the number of horse and foot, chariots and elephants, which compose an
Akshauhini for thou art fully informed.'
"Sauti said, 'One chariot, one elephant, five foot-soldiers, and three horses
form one Patti; three pattis make one Sena-mukha; three sena-mukhas are
called a Gulma; three gulmas, a Gana; three ganas, a Vahini; three vahinis
together are called a Pritana; three pritanas form a Chamu; three chamus,
one Anikini; and an anikini taken ten times forms, as it is styled by those
who know, an Akshauhini. O ye best of Brahmanas, arithmeticians have
calculated that the number of chariots in an Akshauhini is twenty-one
thousand eight hundred and seventy. The measure of elephants must be
fixed at the same number. O ye pure, you must know that the number of
foot-soldiers is one hundred and nine thousand, three hundred and fifty, the
number of horse is sixty-five thousand, six hundred and ten. These, O
Brahmanas, as fully explained by me, are the numbers of an Akshauhini as
said by those acquainted with the principles of numbers. O best of
Brahmanas, according to this calculation were composed the eighteen
Akshauhinis of the Kaurava and the Pandava army. Time, whose acts are
wonderful assembled them on that spot and having made the Kauravas the
cause, destroyed them all. Bhishma acquainted with choice of weapons,
fought for ten days. Drona protected the Kaurava Vahinis for five days.
Kama the desolator of hostile armies fought for two days; and Salya for half
a day. After that lasted for half a day the encounter with clubs between
Duryodhana and Bhima. At the close of that day, Aswatthaman and Kripa
destroyed the army of Yudishthira in the night while sleeping without
suspicion of danger.
'O Saunaka, this best of narrations called Bharata which has begun to be
repeated at thy sacrifice, was formerly repeated at the sacrifice of
Janamejaya by an intelligent disciple of Vyasa. It is divided into several
sections; in the beginning are Paushya, Pauloma, and Astika parvas,
describing in full the valour and renown of kings. It is a work whose
description, diction, and sense are varied and wonderful. It contains an
account of various manners and rites. It is accepted by the wise, as the state
called Vairagya is by men desirous of final release. As Self among things to
be known, as life among things that are dear, so is this history that
furnisheth the means of arriving at the knowledge of Brahma the first
among all the sastras. There is not a story current in this world but doth
depend upon this history even as the body upon the foot that it taketh. As
masters of good lineage are ever attended upon by servants desirous of
preferment so is the Bharata cherished by all poets. As the words
constituting the several branches of knowledge appertaining to the world
and the Veda display only vowels and consonants, so this excellent history
displayeth only the highest wisdom.
'Listen, O ye ascetics, to the outlines of the several divisions (parvas) of this
history called Bharata, endued with great wisdom, of sections and feet that
are wonderful and various, of subtile meanings and logical connections, and
embellished with the substance of the Vedas.
'The first parva is called Anukramanika; the second, Sangraha; then
Paushya; then Pauloma; the Astika; then Adivansavatarana. Then comes the
Sambhava of wonderful and thrilling incidents. Then comes Jatugrihadaha
(setting fire to the house of lac) and then Hidimbabadha (the killing of
Hidimba) parvas; then comes Baka-badha (slaughter of Baka) and then
Chitraratha. The next is called Swayamvara (selection of husband by
Panchali), in which Arjuna by the exercise of Kshatriya virtues, won
Draupadi for wife. Then comes Vaivahika (marriage). Then comes
Viduragamana (advent of Vidura), Rajyalabha (acquirement of kingdom),
Arjuna-banavasa (exile of Arjuna) and Subhadra-harana (the carrying away
of Subhadra). After these come Harana-harika, Khandava-daha (the burning
of the Khandava forest) and Maya-darsana (meeting with Maya the Asura
architect). Then come Sabha, Mantra, Jarasandha, Digvijaya (general
campaign). After Digvijaya come Raja-suyaka, Arghyaviharana (the
robbing of the Arghya) and Sisupala-badha (the killing of Sisupala). After
these, Dyuta (gambling), Anudyuta (subsequent to gambling), Aranyaka,
and Krimira-badha (destruction of Krimira). The Arjuna-vigamana (the
travels of Arjuna), Kairati. In the last hath been described the battle
between Arjuna and Mahadeva in the guise of a hunter. After this Indra￾lokavigamana (the journey to the regions of Indra); then that mine of
religion and virtue, the highly pathetic Nalopakhyana (the story of Nala).
After this last, Tirtha-yatra or the pilgrimage of the wise prince of the
Kurus, the death of Jatasura, and the battle of the Yakshas. Then the battle
with the Nivata-kavachas, Ajagara, and Markandeya-Samasya (meeting
with Markandeya). Then the meeting of Draupadi and Satyabhama,
Ghoshayatra, Mirga-Swapna (dream of the deer). Then the story of
Brihadaranyaka and then Aindradrumna. Then Draupadi-harana (the
abduction of Draupadi), Jayadratha-bimoksana (the release of Jayadratha).
Then the story of 'Savitri' illustrating the great merit of connubial chastity.
After this last, the story of 'Rama'. The parva that comes next is called
'Kundala-harana' (the theft of the ear-rings). That which comes next is
'Aranya' and then 'Vairata'. Then the entry of the Pandavas and the
fulfilment of their promise (of living unknown for one year). Then the
destruction of the 'Kichakas', then the attempt to take the kine (of Virata by
the Kauravas). The next is called the marriage of Abhimanyu with the
daughter of Virata. The next you must know is the most wonderful parva
called Udyoga. The next must be known by the name of 'Sanjaya-yana' (the
arrival of Sanjaya). Then comes 'Prajagara' (the sleeplessness of
Dhritarashtra owing to his anxiety). Then Sanatsujata, in which are the
mysteries of spiritual philosophy. Then 'Yanasaddhi', and then the arrival of
Krishna. Then the story of 'Matali' and then of 'Galava'. Then the stories of
'Savitri', 'Vamadeva', and 'Vainya'. Then the story of 'Jamadagnya and
Shodasarajika'. Then the arrival of Krishna at the court, and then
Bidulaputrasasana. Then the muster of troops and the story of Sheta. Then,
must you know, comes the quarrel of the high-souled Karna. Then the
march to the field of the troops of both sides. The next hath been called
numbering the Rathis and Atirathas. Then comes the arrival of the
messenger Uluka which kindled the wrath (of the Pandavas). The next that
comes, you must know, is the story of Amba. Then comes the thrilling story
of the installation of Bhishma as commander-in-chief. The next is called the
creation of the insular region Jambu; then Bhumi; then the account about
the formation of islands. Then comes the 'Bhagavat-gita'; and then the death
of Bhishma. Then the installation of Drona; then the destruction of the
'Sansaptakas'. Then the death of Abhimanyu; and then the vow of Arjuna
(to slay Jayadratha). Then the death of Jayadratha, and then of Ghatotkacha.
Then, must you know, comes the story of the death of Drona of surprising
interest. The next that comes is called the discharge of the weapon called
Narayana. Then, you know, is Karna, and then Salya. Then comes the
immersion in the lake, and then the encounter (between Bhima and
Duryodhana) with clubs. Then comes Saraswata, and then the descriptions
of holy shrines, and then genealogies. Then comes Sauptika describing
incidents disgraceful (to the honour of the Kurus). Then comes the 'Aisika'
of harrowing incidents. Then comes 'Jalapradana' oblations of water to the
manes of the deceased, and then the wailings of the women. The next must
be known as 'Sraddha' describing the funeral rites performed for the slain
Kauravas. Then comes the destruction of the Rakshasa Charvaka who had
assumed the disguise of a Brahmana (for deceiving Yudhishthira). Then the
coronation of the wise Yudhishthira. The next is called the
'Grihapravibhaga'. Then comes 'Santi', then 'Rajadharmanusasana', then
'Apaddharma', then 'Mokshadharma'. Those that follow are called
respectively 'Suka-prasna-abhigamana', 'Brahma-prasnanusana', the origin
of 'Durvasa', the disputations with Maya. The next is to be known as
'Anusasanika'. Then the ascension of Bhishma to heaven. Then the horse￾sacrifice, which when read purgeth all sins away. The next must be known
as the 'Anugita' in which are words of spiritual philosophy. Those that
follow are called 'Asramvasa', 'Puttradarshana' (meeting with the spirits of
the deceased sons), and the arrival of Narada. The next is called 'Mausala'
which abounds with terrible and cruel incidents. Then comes
'Mahaprasthanika' and ascension to heaven. Then comes the Purana which
is called Khilvansa. In this last are contained 'Vishnuparva', Vishnu's frolics
and feats as a child, the destruction of 'Kansa', and lastly, the very
wonderful 'Bhavishyaparva' (in which there are prophecies regarding the
future).
The high-souled Vyasa composed these hundred parvas of which the above
is only an abridgement: having distributed them into eighteen, the son of
Suta recited them consecutively in the forest of Naimisha as follows:
'In the Adi parva are contained Paushya, Pauloma, Astika, Adivansavatara,
Samva, the burning of the house of lac, the slaying of Hidimba, the
destruction of the Asura Vaka, Chitraratha, the Swayamvara of Draupadi,
her marriage after the overthrow of rivals in war, the arrival of Vidura, the
restoration, Arjuna's exile, the abduction of Subhadra, the gift and receipt of
the marriage dower, the burning of the Khandava forest, and the meeting
with (the Asura-architect) Maya. The Paushya parva treats of the greatness
of Utanka, and the Pauloma, of the sons of Bhrigu. The Astika describes the
birth of Garuda and of the Nagas (snakes), the churning of the ocean, the
incidents relating to the birth of the celestial steed Uchchaihsrava, and
finally, the dynasty of Bharata, as described in the Snake-sacrifice of king
Janamejaya. The Sambhava parva narrates the birth of various kings and
heroes, and that of the sage, Krishna Dwaipayana: the partial incarnations
of deities, the generation of Danavas and Yakshas of great prowess, and
serpents, Gandharvas, birds, and of all creatures; and lastly, of the life and
adventures of king Bharata--the progenitor of the line that goes by his
name--the son born of Sakuntala in the hermitage of the ascetic Kanwa.
This parva also describes the greatness of Bhagirathi, and the births of the
Vasus in the house of Santanu and their ascension to heaven. In this parva is
also narrated the birth of Bhishma uniting in himself portions of the
energies of the other Vasus, his renunciation of royalty and adoption of the
Brahmacharya mode of life, his adherence to his vows, his protection of
Chitrangada, and after the death of Chitrangada, his protection of his
younger brother, Vichitravirya, and his placing the latter on the throne: the
birth of Dharma among men in consequence of the curse of Animondavya;
the births of Dhritarashtra and Pandu through the potency of Vyasa's
blessings (?) and also the birth of the Pandavas; the plottings of
Duryodhana to send the sons of Pandu to Varanavata, and the other dark
counsels of the sons of Dhritarashtra in regard to the Pandavas; then the
advice administered to Yudhishthira on his way by that well-wisher of the
Pandavas--Vidura--in the mlechchha language--the digging of the hole, the
burning of Purochana and the sleeping woman of the fowler caste, with her
five sons, in the house of lac; the meeting of the Pandavas in the dreadful
forest with Hidimba, and the slaying of her brother Hidimba by Bhima of
great prowess. The birth of Ghatotkacha; the meeting of the Pandavas with
Vyasa and in accordance with his advice their stay in disguise in the house
of a Brahmana in the city of Ekachakra; the destruction of the Asura Vaka,
and the amazement of the populace at the sight; the extra-ordinary births of
Krishna and Dhrishtadyumna; the departure of the Pandavas for Panchala in
obedience to the injunction of Vyasa, and moved equally by the desire of
winning the hand of Draupadi on learning the tidings of the Swayamvara
from the lips of a Brahmana; victory of Arjuna over a Gandharva, called
Angaraparna, on the banks of the Bhagirathi, his contraction of friendship
with his adversary, and his hearing from the Gandharva the history of
Tapati, Vasishtha and Aurva. This parva treats of the journey of the
Pandavas towards Panchala, the acquisition of Draupadi in the midst of all
the Rajas, by Arjuna, after having successfully pierced the mark; and in the
ensuing fight, the defeat of Salya, Kama, and all the other crowned heads at
the hands of Bhima and Arjuna of great prowess; the ascertainment by
Balarama and Krishna, at the sight of these matchless exploits, that the
heroes were the Pandavas, and the arrival of the brothers at the house of the
potter where the Pandavas were staying; the dejection of Drupada on
learning that Draupadi was to be wedded to five husbands; the wonderful
story of the five Indras related in consequence; the extraordinary and
divinely-ordained wedding of Draupadi; the sending of Vidura by the sons
of Dhritarashtra as envoy to the Pandavas; the arrival of Vidura and his
sight to Krishna; the abode of the Pandavas in Khandava-prastha, and then
their rule over one half of the kingdom; the fixing of turns by the sons of
Pandu, in obedience to the injunction of Narada, for connubial
companionship with Krishna. In like manner hath the history of Sunda and
Upasunda been recited in this. This parva then treats of the departure of
Arjuna for the forest according to the vow, he having seen Draupadi and
Yudhishthira sitting together as he entered the chamber to take out arms for
delivering the kine of a certain Brahmana. This parva then describes
Arjuna's meeting on the way with Ulupi, the daughter of a Naga (serpent); it
then relates his visits to several sacred spots; the birth of Vabhruvahana; the
deliverance by Arjuna of the five celestial damsels who had been turned
into alligators by the imprecation of a Brahmana, the meeting of Madhava
and Arjuna on the holy spot called Prabhasa; the carrying away of Subhadra
by Arjuna, incited thereto by her brother Krishna, in the wonderful car
moving on land and water, and through mid-air, according to the wish of the
rider; the departure for Indraprastha, with the dower; the conception in the
womb of Subhadra of that prodigy of prowess, Abhimanyu; Yajnaseni's
giving birth to children; then follows the pleasure-trip of Krishna and
Arjuna to the banks of the Jamuna and the acquisition by them of the discus
and the celebrated bow Gandiva; the burning of the forest of Khandava; the
rescue of Maya by Arjuna, and the escape of the serpent,--and the begetting
of a son by that best of Rishis, Mandapala, in the womb of the bird Sarngi.
This parva is divided by Vyasa into two hundred and twenty-seven chapters.
These two hundred and twenty-seven chapters contain eight thousand eight
hundred and eighty-four slokas.
The second is the extensive parva called Sabha or the assembly, full of
matter. The subjects of this parva are the establishment of the grand hall by
the Pandavas; their review of their retainers; the description of the lokapalas
by Narada well-acquainted with the celestial regions; the preparations for
the Rajasuya sacrifice; the destruction of Jarasandha; the deliverance by
Vasudeva of the princes confined in the mountain-pass; the campaign of
universal conquest by the Pandavas; the arrival of the princes at the
Rajasuya sacrifice with tribute; the destruction of Sisupala on the occasion
of the sacrifice, in connection with offering of arghya; Bhimasena's ridicule
of Duryodhana in the assembly; Duryodhana's sorrow and envy at the sight
of the magnificent scale on which the arrangements had been made; the
indignation of Duryodhana in consequence, and the preparations for the
game of dice; the defeat of Yudhishthira at play by the wily Sakuni; the
deliverance by Dhritarashtra of his afflicted daughter-in-law Draupadi
plunged in the sea of distress caused by the gambling, as of a boat tossed
about by the tempestuous waves. The endeavours of Duryodhana to engage
Yudhishthira again in the game; and the exile of the defeated Yudhishthira
with his brothers. These constitute what has been called by the great Vyasa
the Sabha Parva. This parva is divided into seventh-eight sections, O best of
Brahmanas, of two thousand, five hundred and seven slokas.
Then comes the third parva called Aranyaka (relating to the forest) This
parva treats of the wending of the Pandavas to the forest and the citizens,
following the wise Yudhishthira, Yudhishthira's adoration of the god of day;
according to the injunctions of Dhaumya, to be gifted with the power of
maintaining the dependent Brahmanas with food and drink: the creation of
food through the grace of the Sun: the expulsion by Dhritarashtra of Vidura
who always spoke for his master's good; Vidura's coming to the Pandavas
and his return to Dhritarashtra at the solicitation of the latter; the wicked
Duryodhana's plottings to destroy the forest-ranging Pandavas, being
incited thereto by Karna; the appearance of Vyasa and his dissuasion of
Duryodhana bent on going to the forest; the history of Surabhi; the arrival
of Maitreya; his laying down to Dhritarashtra the course of action; and his
curse on Duryodhana; Bhima's slaying of Kirmira in battle; the coming of
the Panchalas and the princes of the Vrishni race to Yudhishthira on hearing
of his defeat at the unfair gambling by Sakuni; Dhananjaya's allaying the
wrath of Krishna; Draupadi's lamentations before Madhava; Krishna's
cheering her; the fall of Sauva also has been here described by the Rishi;
also Krishna's bringing Subhadra with her son to Dwaraka; and
Dhrishtadyumna's bringing the son of Draupadi to Panchala; the entrance of
the sons of Pandu into the romantic Dwaita wood; conversation of Bhima,
Yudhishthira, and Draupadi; the coming of Vyasa to the Pandavas and his
endowing Yudhishthira with the power of Pratismriti; then, after the
departure of Vyasa, the removal of the Pandavas to the forest of Kamyaka;
the wanderings of Arjuna of immeasurable prowess in search of weapons;
his battle with Mahadeva in the guise of a hunter; his meeting with the
lokapalas and receipt of weapons from them; his journey to the regions of
Indra for arms and the consequent anxiety of Dhritarashtra; the wailings and
lamentations of Yudhishthira on the occasion of his meeting with the
worshipful great sage Brihadaswa. Here occurs the holy and highly pathetic
story of Nala illustrating the patience of Damayanti and the character of
Nala. Then the acquirement by Yudhishthira of the mysteries of dice from
the same great sage; then the arrival of the Rishi Lomasa from the heavens
to where the Pandavas were, and the receipt by these high-souled dwellers
in the woods of the intelligence brought by the Rishi of their brother Arjuna
staving in the heavens; then the pilgrimage of the Pandavas to various
sacred spots in accordance with the message of Arjuna, and their attainment
of great merit and virtue consequent on such pilgrimage; then the
pilgrimage of the great sage Narada to the shrine Putasta; also the
pilgrimage of the high-souled Pandavas. Here is the deprivation of Karna of
his ear-rings by Indra. Here also is recited the sacrificial magnificence of
Gaya; then the story of Agastya in which the Rishi ate up the Asura Vatapi,
and his connubial connection with Lopamudra from the desire of offspring.
Then the story of Rishyasringa who adopted Brahmacharya mode of life
from his very boyhood; then the history of Rama of great prowess, the son
of Jamadagni, in which has been narrated the death of Kartavirya and the
Haihayas; then the meeting between the Pandavas and the Vrishnis in the
sacred spot called Prabhasa; then the story of Su-kanya in which Chyavana,
the son of Bhrigu, made the twins, Aswinis, drink, at the sacrifice of king
Saryati, the Soma juice (from which they had been excluded by the other
gods), and in which besides is shown how Chyavana himself acquired
perpetual youth (as a boon from the grateful Aswinis). Then hath been
described the history of king Mandhata; then the history of prince Jantu;
and how king Somaka by offering up his only son (Jantu) in sacrifice
obtained a hundred others; then the excellent history of the hawk and the
pigeon; then the examination of king Sivi by Indra, Agni, and Dharma; then
the story of Ashtavakra, in which occurs the disputation, at the sacrifice of
Janaka, between that Rishi and the first of logicians, Vandi, the son of
Varuna; the defeat of Vandi by the great Ashtavakra, and the release by the
Rishi of his father from the depths of the ocean. Then the story of
Yavakrita, and then that of the great Raivya: then the departure (of the
Pandavas) for Gandhamadana and their abode in the asylum called
Narayana; then Bhimasena's journey to Gandhamadana at the request of
Draupadi (in search of the sweet-scented flower). Bhima's meeting on his
way, in a grove of bananas, with Hanuman, the son of Pavana of great
prowess; Bhima's bath in the tank and the destruction of the flowers therein
for obtaining the sweet-scented flower (he was in search of); his consequent
battle with the mighty Rakshasas and the Yakshas of great prowess
including Hanuman; the destruction of the Asura Jata by Bhima; the
meeting (of the Pandavas) with the royal sage Vrishaparva; their departure
for the asylum of Arshtishena and abode therein: the incitement of Bhima
(to acts of vengeance) by Draupadi. Then is narrated the ascent on the hills
of Kailasa by Bhimasena, his terrific battle with the mighty Yakshas headed
by Hanuman; then the meeting of the Pandavas with Vaisravana (Kuvera),
and the meeting with Arjuna after he had obtained for the purpose of
Yudhishthira many celestial weapons; then Arjuna's terrible encounter with
the Nivatakavachas dwelling in Hiranyaparva, and also with the Paulomas,
and the Kalakeyas; their destruction at the hands of Arjuna; the
commencement of the display of the celestial weapons by Arjuna before
Yudhishthira, the prevention of the same by Narada; the descent of the
Pandavas from Gandhamadana; the seizure of Bhima in the forest by a
mighty serpent huge as the mountain; his release from the coils of the
snake, upon Yudhishthira's answering certain questions; the return of the
Pandavas to the Kamyaka woods. Here is described the reappearance of
Vasudeva to see the mighty sons of Pandu; the arrival of Markandeya, and
various recitals, the history of Prithu the son of Vena recited by the great
Rishi; the stories of Saraswati and the Rishi Tarkhya. After these, is the
story of Matsya; other old stories recited by Markandeya; the stories of
Indradyumna and Dhundhumara; then the history of the chaste wife; the
history of Angira, the meeting and conversation of Draupadi and
Satyabhama; the return of the Pandavas to the forest of Dwaita; then the
procession to see the calves and the captivity of Duryodhana; and when the
wretch was being carried off, his rescue by Arjuna; here is Yudhishthira's
dream of the deer; then the re-entry of the Pandavas into the Kamyaka
forest, here also is the long story of Vrihidraunika. Here also is recited the
story of Durvasa; then the abduction by Jayadratha of Draupadi from the
asylum; the pursuit of the ravisher by Bhima swift as the air and the ill￾shaving of Jayadratha's crown at Bhima's hand. Here is the long history of
Rama in which is shown how Rama by his prowess slew Ravana in battle.
Here also is narrated the story of Savitri; then Karna's deprivation by Indra
of his ear-rings; then the presentation to Karna by the gratified Indra of a
Sakti (missile weapon) which had the virtue of killing only one person
against whom it might be hurled; then the story called Aranya in which
Dharma (the god of justice) gave advice to his son (Yudhishthira); in which,
besides is recited how the Pandavas after having obtained a boon went
towards the west. These are all included in the third Parva called Aranyaka,
consisting of two hundred and sixty-nine sections. The number of slokas is
eleven thousand, six hundred and sixty-four.
"The extensive Parva that comes next is called Virata. The Pandavas
arriving at the dominions of Virata saw in a cemetery on the outskirts of the
city a large shami tree whereon they kept their weapons. Here hath been
recited their entry into the city and their stay there in disguise. Then the
slaying by Bhima of the wicked Kichaka who, senseless with lust, had
sought Draupadi; the appointment by prince Duryodhana of clever spies;
and their despatch to all sides for tracing the Pandavas; the failure of these
to discover the mighty sons of Pandu; the first seizure of Virata's kine by
the Trigartas and the terrific battle that ensued; the capture of Virata by the
enemy and his rescue by Bhimasena; the release also of the kine by the
Pandava (Bhima); the seizure of Virata's kine again by the Kurus; the defeat
in battle of all the Kurus by the single-handed Arjuna; the release of the
king's kine; the bestowal by Virata of his daughter Uttara for Arjuna's
acceptance on behalf of his son by Subhadra--Abhimanyu--the destroyer of
foes. These are the contents of the extensive fourth Parva--the Virata. The
great Rishi Vyasa has composed in these sixty-seven sections. The number
of slokas is two thousand and fifty.
"Listen then to (the contents of) the fifth Parva which must be known as
Udyoga. While the Pandavas, desirous of victory, were residing in the place
called Upaplavya, Duryodhana and Arjuna both went at the same time to
Vasudeva, and said, "You should render us assistance in this war." The high￾souled Krishna, upon these words being uttered, replied, "O ye first of men,
a counsellor in myself who will not fight and one Akshauhini of troops,
which of these shall I give to which of you?" Blind to his own interests, the
foolish Duryodhana asked for the troops; while Arjuna solicited Krishna as
an unfighting counsellor. Then is described how, when the king of Madra
was coming for the assistance of the Pandavas, Duryodhana, having
deceived him on the way by presents and hospitality, induced him to grant a
boon and then solicited his assistance in battle; how Salya, having passed
his word to Duryodhana, went to the Pandavas and consoled them by
reciting the history of Indra's victory (over Vritra). Then comes the despatch
by the Pandavas of their Purohita (priest) to the Kauravas. Then is described
how king Dhritarashtra of great prowess, having heard the word of the
purohita of the Pandavas and the story of Indra's victory decided upon
sending his purohita and ultimately despatched Sanjaya as envoy to the
Pandavas from desire for peace. Here hath been described the sleeplessness
of Dhritarashtra from anxiety upon hearing all about the Pandavas and their
friends, Vasudeva and others. It was on this occasion that Vidura addressed
to the wise king Dhritarashtra various counsels that were full of wisdom. It
was here also that Sanat-sujata recited to the anxious and sorrowing
monarch the excellent truths of spiritual philosophy. On the next morning
Sanjaya spoke, in the court of the King, of the identity of Vasudeva and
Arjuna. It was then that the illustrious Krishna, moved by kindness and a
desire for peace, went himself to the Kaurava capital, Hastinapura, for
bringing about peace. Then comes the rejection by prince Duryodhana of
the embassy of Krishna who had come to solicit peace for the benefit of
both parties. Here hath been recited the story of Damvodvava; then the
story of the high-souled Matuli's search for a husband for his daughter: then
the history of the great sage Galava; then the story of the training and
discipline of the son of Bidula. Then the exhibition by Krishna, before the
assembled Rajas, of his Yoga powers upon learning the evil counsels of
Duryodhana and Karna; then Krishna's taking Karna in his chariot and his
tendering to him of advice, and Karna's rejection of the same from pride.
Then the return of Krishna, the chastiser of enemies from Hastinapura to
Upaplavya, and his narration to the Pandavas of all that had happened. It
was then that those oppressors of foes, the Pandavas, having heard all and
consulted properly with each other, made every preparation for war. Then
comes the march from Hastinapura, for battle, of foot-soldiers, horses,
charioteers and elephants. Then the tale of the troops by both parties. Then
the despatch by prince Duryodhana of Uluka as envoy to the Pandavas on
the day previous to the battle. Then the tale of charioteers of different
classes. Then the story of Amba. These all have been described in the fifth
Parva called Udyoga of the Bharata, abounding with incidents appertaining
to war and peace. O ye ascetics, the great Vyasa hath composed one
hundred and eighty-six sections in this Parva. The number of slokas also
composed in this by the great Rishi is six thousand, six hundred and ninety￾eight.
"Then is recited the Bhishma Parva replete with wonderful incidents. In this
hath been narrated by Sanjaya the formation of the region known as Jambu.
Here hath been described the great depression of Yudhishthira's army, and
also a fierce fight for ten successive days. In this the high-souled Vasudeva
by reasons based on the philosophy of final release drove away Arjuna's
compunction springing from the latter's regard for his kindred (whom he
was on the eve of slaying). In this the magnanimous Krishna, attentive to
the welfare of Yudhishthira, seeing the loss inflicted (on the Pandava army),
descended swiftly from his chariot himself and ran, with dauntless breast,
his driving whip in hand, to effect the death of Bhishma. In this, Krishna
also smote with piercing words Arjuna, the bearer of the Gandiva and the
foremost in battle among all wielders of weapons. In this, the foremost of
bowmen, Arjuna, placing Shikandin before him and piercing Bhishma with
his sharpest arrows felled him from his chariot. In this, Bhishma lay
stretched on his bed of arrows. This extensive Parva is known as the sixth in
the Bharata. In this have been composed one hundred and seventeen
sections. The number of slokas is five thousand, eight hundred and eighty￾four as told by Vyasa conversant with the Vedas.
"Then is recited the wonderful Parva called Drona full of incidents. First
comes the installation in the command of the army of the great instructor in
arms, Drona: then the vow made by that great master of weapons of seizing
the wise Yudhishthira in battle to please Duryodhana; then the retreat of
Arjuna from the field before the Sansaptakas, then the overthrow of
Bhagadatta like to a second Indra in the field, with the elephant Supritika,
by Arjuna; then the death of the hero Abhimanyu in his teens, alone and
unsupported, at the hands of many Maharathas including Jayadratha; then
after the death of Abhimanyu, the destruction by Arjuna, in battle of seven
Akshauhinis of troops and then of Jayadratha; then the entry, by Bhima of
mighty arms and by that foremost of warriors-in-chariot, Satyaki, into the
Kaurava ranks impenetrable even to the gods, in search of Arjuna in
obedience to the orders of Yudhishthira, and the destruction of the remnant
of the Sansaptakas. In the Drona Parva, is the death of Alambusha, of
Srutayus, of Jalasandha, of Shomadatta, of Virata, of the great warrior-in￾chariot Drupada, of Ghatotkacha and others; in this Parva, Aswatthaman,
excited beyond measure at the fall of his father in battle, discharged the
terrible weapon Narayana. Then the glory of Rudra in connection with the
burning (of the three cities). Then the arrival of Vyasa and recital by him of
the glory of Krishna and Arjuna. This is the great seventh Parva of the
Bharata in which all the heroic chiefs and princes mentioned were sent to
their account. The number of sections in this is one hundred and seventy.
The number of slokas as composed in the Drona Parva by Rishi Vyasa, the
son of Parasara and the possessor of true knowledge after much meditation,
is eight thousand, nine hundred and nine.
"Then comes the most wonderful Parva called Karna. In this is narrated the
appointment of the wise king of Madra as (Karna's) charioteer. Then the
history of the fall of the Asura Tripura. Then the application to each other
by Karna and Salya of harsh words on their setting out for the field, then the
story of the swan and the crow recited in insulting allusion: then the death
of Pandya at the hands of the high-souled Aswatthaman; then the death of
Dandasena; then that of Darda; then Yudhishthira's imminent risk in single
combat with Karna in the presence of all the warriors; then the mutual
wrath of Yudhishthira and Arjuna; then Krishna's pacification of Arjuna. In
this Parva, Bhima, in fulfilment of his vow, having ripped open Dussasana's
breast in battle drank the blood of his heart. Then Arjuna slew the great
Karna in single combat. Readers of the Bharata call this the eighth Parva.
The number of sections in this is sixty-nine and the number of slokas is four
thousand, nine hundred and sixty-tour.
"Then hath been recited the wonderful Parva called Salya. After all the
great warriors had been slain, the king of Madra became the leader of the
(Kaurava) army. The encounters one after another, of charioteers, have been
here described. Then comes the fall of the great Salya at the hands of
Yudhishthira, the Just. Here also is the death of Sakuni in battle at the hands
of Sahadeva. Upon only a small remnant of the troops remaining alive after
the immense slaughter, Duryodhana went to the lake and creating for
himself room within its waters lay stretched there for some time. Then is
narrated the receipt of this intelligence by Bhima from the fowlers: then is
narrated how, moved by the insulting speeches of the intelligent
Yudhishthira, Duryodhana ever unable to bear affronts, came out of the
waters. Then comes the encounter with clubs, between Duryodhana and
Bhima; then the arrival, at the time of such encounter, of Balarama: then is
described the sacredness of the Saraswati; then the progress of the
encounter with clubs; then the fracture of Duryodhana's thighs in battle by
Bhima with (a terrific hurl of) his mace. These all have been described in
the wonderful ninth Parva. In this the number of sections is fifty-nine and
the number of slokas composed by the great Vyasa--the spreader of the
fame of the Kauravas--is three thousand, two hundred and twenty.
"Then shall I describe the Parva called Sauptika of frightful incidents. On
the Pandavas having gone away, the mighty charioteers, Kritavarman,
Kripa, and the son of Drona, came to the field of battle in the evening and
there saw king Duryodhana lying on the ground, his thighs broken, and
himself covered with blood. Then the great charioteer, the son of Drona, of
terrible wrath, vowed, 'without killing all the Panchalas including
Drishtadyumna, and the Pandavas also with all their allies, I will not take
off armour.' Having spoken those words, the three warriors leaving
Duryodhana's side entered the great forest just as the sun was setting. While
sitting under a large banian tree in the night, they saw an owl killing
numerous crows one after another. At the sight of this, Aswatthaman, his
heart full of rage at the thought of his father's fate, resolved to slay the
slumbering Panchalas. And wending to the gate of the camp, he saw there a
Rakshasa of frightful visage, his head reaching to the very heavens,
guarding the entrance. And seeing that Rakshasa obstructing all his
weapons, the son of Drona speedily pacified by worship the three-eyed
Rudra. And then accompanied by Kritavarman and Kripa he slew all the
sons of Draupadi, all the Panchalas with Dhrishtadyumna and others,
together with their relatives, slumbering unsuspectingly in the night. All
perished on that fatal night except the five Pandavas and the great warrior
Satyaki. Those escaped owing to Krishna's counsels, then the charioteer of
Dhrishtadyumna brought to the Pandavas intelligence of the slaughter of the
slumbering Panchalas by the son of Drona. Then Draupadi distressed at the
death of her sons and brothers and father sat before her lords resolved to kill
herself by fasting. Then Bhima of terrible prowess, moved by the words of
Draupadi, resolved, to please her; and speedily taking up his mace followed
in wrath the son of his preceptor in arms. The son of Drona from fear of
Bhimasena and impelled by the fates and moved also by anger discharged a
celestial weapon saying, 'This is for the destruction of all the Pandavas';
then Krishna saying. 'This shall not be', neutralised Aswatthaman's speech.
Then Arjuna neutralised that weapon by one of his own. Seeing the wicked
Aswatthaman's destructive intentions, Dwaipayana and Krishna pronounced
curses on him which the latter returned. Pandava then deprived the mighty
warrior-in-chariot Aswatthaman, of the jewel on his head, and became
exceedingly glad, and, boastful of their success, made a present of it to the
sorrowing Draupadi. Thus the tenth Parva, called Sauptika, is recited. The
great Vyasa hath composed this in eighteen sections. The number of slokas
also composed (in this) by the great reciter of sacred truths is eight hundred
and seventy. In this Parva has been put together by the great Rishi the two
Parvas called Sauptika and Aishika.
"After this hath been recited the highly pathetic Parva called Stri,
Dhritarashtra of prophetic eye, afflicted at the death of his children, and
moved by enmity towards Bhima, broke into pieces a statue of hard iron
deftly placed before him by Krishna (as substitute of Bhima). Then Vidura,
removing the distressed Dhritarashtra's affection for worldly things by
reasons pointing to final release, consoled that wise monarch. Then hath
been described the wending of the distressed Dhritarashtra accompanied by
the ladies of his house to the field of battle of the Kauravas. Here follow the
pathetic wailings of the wives of the slain heroes. Then the wrath of
Gandhari and Dhritarashtra and their loss of consciousness. Then the
Kshatriya ladies saw those heroes,--their unreturning sons, brothers, and
fathers,--lying dead on the field. Then the pacification by Krishna of the
wrath of Gandhari distressed at the death of her sons and grandsons. Then
the cremation of the bodies of the deceased Rajas with due rites by that
monarch (Yudhishthira) of great wisdom and the foremost also of all
virtuous men. Then upon the presentation of water of the manes of the
deceased princes having commenced, the story of Kunti's acknowledgment
of Karna as her son born in secret. Those have all been described by the
great Rishi Vyasa in the highly pathetic eleventh Parva. Its perusal moveth
every feeling heart with sorrow and even draweth tears from the eyes. The
number of sections composed is twenty-seven. The number of slokas is
seven hundred and seventy-five.
"Twelfth in number cometh the Santi Parva, which increaseth the
understanding and in which is related the despondency of Yudhishthira on
his having slain his fathers, brothers, sons, maternal uncles and matrimonial
relations. In this Parva is described how from his bed of arrows Bhishma
expounded various systems of duties worth the study of kings desirous of
knowledge; this Parva expounded the duties relative to emergencies, with
full indications of time and reasons. By understanding these, a person
attaineth to consummate knowledge. The mysteries also of final
emancipation have been expatiated upon. This is the twelfth Parva the
favourite of the wise. It consists of three hundred and thirty-nine sections,
and contains fourteen thousand, seven hundred and thirty-two slokas.
"Next in order is the excellent Anusasana Parva. In it is described how
Yudhishthira, the king of the Kurus, was reconciled to himself on hearing
the exposition of duties by Bhishma, the son of Bhagirathi. This Parva
treats of rules in detail and of Dharma and Artha; then the rules of charity
and its merits; then the qualifications of donees, and the supreme ride￾regarding gifts. This Parva also describes the ceremonials of individual
duty, the rules of conduct and the matchless merit of truth. This Parva
showeth the great merit of Brahmanas and kine, and unraveleth the
mysteries of duties in relation to time and place. These are embodied in the
excellent Parva called Anusasana of varied incidents. In this hath been
described the ascension of Bhishma to Heaven. This is the thirteenth Parva
which hath laid down accurately the various duties of men. The number of
sections, in this is one hundred and forty-six. The number of slokas is eight
thousand.
"Then comes the fourteenth Parva Aswamedhika. In this is the excellent
story of Samvarta and Marutta. Then is described the discovery (by the
Pandavas) of golden treasuries; and then the birth of Parikshit who was
revived by Krishna after having been burnt by the (celestial) weapon of
Aswatthaman. The battles of Arjuna the son of Pandu, while following the
sacrificial horse let loose, with various princes who in wrath seized it. Then
is shown the great risk of Arjuna in his encounter with Vabhruvahana the
son of Chitrangada (by Arjuna) the appointed daughter of the chief of
Manipura. Then the story of the mongoose during the performance of the
horse-sacrifice. This is the most wonderful Parva called Aswamedhika. The
number of sections is one hundred and three. The number of slokas
composed (in this) by Vyasa of true knowledge is three thousand, three
hundred and twenty.
"Then comes the fifteenth Parva called Asramvasika. In this, Dhritarashtra,
abdicating the kingdom, and accompanied by Gandhari and Vidura went to
the woods. Seeing this, the virtuous Pritha also, ever engaged in cherishing
her superiors, leaving the court of her sons, followed the old couple. In this
is described the wonderful meeting through the kindness of Vyasa of the
king (Dhritarashtra) with the spirits of his slain children, grand-children,
and other princes, returned from the other world. Then the monarch
abandoning his sorrows acquired with his wife the highest fruit of his
meritorious actions. In this Parva, Vidura after having leaned on virtue all
his life attaineth to the most meritorious state.
"The learned son of Gavalgana, Sanjaya, also of passions under full control,
and the foremost of ministers, attained, in the Parva, to the blessed state. In
this, Yudhishthira the just met Narada and heard from him about the
extinction of the race of Vrishnis. This is the very wonderful Parva called
Asramvasika. The number of sections in this is forty-two, and the number
of slokas composed by Vyasa cognisant of truth is one thousand five
hundred and six.
"After this, you know, comes the Maushala of painful incidents. In this,
those lion-hearted heroes (of the race of Vrishni) with the scars of many a
field on their bodies, oppressed with the curse of a Brahmana, while
deprived of reason from drink, impelled by the fates, slew each other on the
shores of the Salt Sea with the Eraka grass which (in their hands) became
(invested with the fatal attributes of the) thunder. In this, both Balarama and
Kesava (Krishna) after causing the extermination of their race, their hour
having come, themselves did not rise superior to the sway of all-destroying
Time. In this, Arjuna the foremost among men, going to Dwaravati
(Dwaraka) and seeing the city destitute of the Vrishnis was much affected
and became exceedingly sorry. Then after the funeral of his maternal uncle
Vasudeva the foremost among the Yadus (Vrishnis), he saw the heroes of
the Yadu race lying stretched in death on the spot where they had been
drinking. He then caused the cremation of the bodies of the illustrious
Krishna and Balarama and of the principal members of the Vrishni race.
Then as he was journeying from Dwaraka with the women and children, the
old and the decrepit--the remnants of the Yadu race--he was met on the way
by a heavy calamity. He witnessed also the disgrace of his bow Gandiva
and the unpropitiousness of his celestial weapons. Seeing all this, Arjuna
became despondent and, pursuant to Vyasa's advice, went to Yudhishthira
and solicited permission to adopt the Sannyasa mode of life. This is the
sixteenth Parva called Maushala The number of sections is eight and the
number of slokas composed by Vyasa cognisant of truth is three hundred
and twenty.
"The next is Mahaprasthanika, the seventeenth Parva.
"In this, those foremost among men the Pandavas abdicating their kingdom
went with Draupadi on their great journey called Mahaprasthana. In this,
they came across Agni, having arrived on the shore of the sea of red waters.
In this, asked by Agni himself, Arjuna worshipped him duly, returned to
him the excellent celestial bow called Gandiva. In this, leaving his brothers
who dropped one after another and Draupadi also, Yudhishthira went on his
journey without once looking back on them. This the seventeenth Parva is
called Mahaprasthanika. The number of sections in this is three. The
number of slokas also composed by Vyasa cognisant of truth is three
hundred and twenty.
"The Parva that comes after this, you must know, is the extraordinary one
called Svarga of celestial incidents. Then seeing the celestial car come to
take him, Yudhishthira moved by kindness towards the dog that
accompanied him, refused to ascend it without his companion. Observing
the illustrious Yudhishthira's steady adherence to virtue, Dharma (the god of
justice) abandoning his canine form showed himself to the king. Then
Yudhishthira ascending to heaven felt much pain. The celestial messenger
showed him hell by an act of deception. Then Yudhishthira, the soul of
justice, heard the heart-rending lamentations of his brothers abiding in that
region under the discipline of Yama. Then Dharma and Indra showed
Yudhishthira the region appointed for sinners. Then Yudhishthira, after
leaving the human body by a plunge in the celestial Ganges, attained to that
region which his acts merited, and began to live in joy respected by Indra
and all other gods. This is the eighteenth Parva as narrated by the illustrious
Vyasa. The number of slokas composed, O ascetics, by the great Rishi in
this is two hundred and nine.
"The above are the contents of the Eighteen Parvas. In the appendix (Khita)
are the Harivansa and the Vavishya. The number of slokas contained in the
Harivansa is twelve thousand."
These are the contents of the section called Parva-sangraha. Sauti
continued, "Eighteen Akshauhinis of troops came together for battle. The
encounter that ensued was terrible and lasted for eighteen days. He who
knows the four Vedas with all the Angas and Upanishads, but does not
know this history (Bharata), cannot be regarded as wise. Vyasa of
immeasurable intelligence, has spoken of the Mahabharata as a treatise on
Artha, on Dharma, and on Kama. Those who have listened to his history
can never bear to listen to others, as, indeed, they who have listened to the
sweet voice of the male Kokila can never hear the dissonance of the crow's
cawing. As the formation of the three worlds proceedeth from the five
elements, so do the inspirations of all poets proceed from this excellent
composition. O ye Brahman, as the four kinds of creatures (viviparous,
oviparous, born of hot moisture and vegetables) are dependent on space for
their existence, so the Puranas depend upon this history. As all the senses
depend for their exercise upon the various modifications of the mind, so do
all acts (ceremonials) and moral qualities depend upon this treatise. There is
not a story current in the world but doth depend on this history, even as
body upon the food it taketh. All poets cherish the Bharata even as servants
desirous of preferment always attend upon masters of good lineage. Even as
the blessed domestic Asrama can never be surpassed by the three other
Asramas (modes of life) so no poets can surpass this poem.
"Ye ascetics, shake off all inaction. Let your hearts be fixed on virtue, for
virtue is the one only friend of him that has gone to the other world. Even
the most intelligent by cherishing wealth and wives can never make these
their own, nor are these possessions lasting. The Bharata uttered by the lips
of Dwaipayana is without a parallel; it is virtue itself and sacred. It
destroyeth sin and produceth good. He that listeneth to it while it is being
recited hath no need of a bath in the sacred waters of Pushkara. A
Brahmana, whatever sins he may commit during the day through his senses,
is freed from them all by reading the Bharata in the evening. Whatever sins
he may commit also in the night by deeds, words, or mind, he is freed from
them all by reading Bharata in the first twilight (morning). He that giveth a
hundred kine with horns mounted with gold to a Brahmana well-posted up
in the Vedas and all branches of learning, and he that daily listeneth to the
sacred narrations of the Bharata, acquireth equal merit. As the wide ocean is
easily passable by men having ships, so is this extensive history of great
excellence and deep import with the help of this chapter called Parva
sangraha."
Thus endeth the section called Parva-sangraha of the Adi Parva of the
blessed Mahabharata.
Paushya Parva
Section 3
Sauti said, "Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, was, with his brothers,
attending his long sacrifice on the plains of Kurukshetra. His brothers were
three, Srutasena, Ugrasena, and Bhimasena. And as they were sitting at the
sacrifice, there arrived at the spot an offspring of Sarama (the celestial
bitch). And belaboured by the brothers of Janamejaya, he ran away to his
mother, crying in pain. And his mother seeing him crying exceedingly
asked him, 'Why criest thou so? Who hath beaten thee? And being thus
questioned, he said unto his mother, 'I have been belaboured by the brothers
of Janamejaya.' And his mother replied, 'Thou hast committed some fault
for which hast thou been beaten!' He answered, 'I have not committed any
fault. I have not touched the sacrificial butter with my tongue, nor have I
even cast a look upon it.' His mother Sarama hearing this and much
distressed at the affliction of her son went to the place where Janamejaya
with his brothers was at his long-extending sacrifice. And she addressed
Janamejaya in anger, saying, 'This my son hath committed no fault: he hath
not looked upon your sacrificial butter, nor hath he touched it with his
tongue. Wherefore hath he been beaten?' They said not a word in reply;
whereupon she said, 'As ye have beaten my son who hath committed no
fault, therefore shall evil come upon ye, when ye least expect it.'
"Janamejaya, thus addressed by the celestial bitch, Sarama, became
exceedingly alarmed and dejected. And after the sacrifice was concluded
returned to Hastinapura, and began to take great pains in searching for a
Purohita who could by procuring absolution for his sin, neutralise the effect
of the curse.
"One day Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, while a-hunting, observed in a
particular part of his dominions a hermitage where dwelt a certain Rishi of
fame, Srutasrava. He had a son named Somasrava deeply engaged in ascetic
devotions. Being desirous of appointing that son of the Rishi as his
Purohita, Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, saluted the Rishi and addressed
him, saying, 'O possessor of the six attributes, let this thy son be my
purohita.' The Rishi thus addressed, answered Janamejaya, 'O Janamejaya,
this my son, deep in ascetic devotions, accomplished in the study of the
Vedas, and endued with the full force of my asceticism, is born of (the
womb of) a she-snake that had drunk my vital fluid. He is able to absolve
thee from all offences save those committed against Mahadeva. But he hath
one particular habit, viz. he would grant to any Brahmana whatever might
be begged of him. If thou canst put up with it, then thou take him.'
Janamejaya thus addressed replied to the Rishi, 'It shall be even so.' And
accepting him for his Purohita, he returned to his capital; and he then
addressed his brothers saying, 'This is the person I have chosen for my
spiritual master; whatsoever he may say must be complied with by you
without examination.' And his brothers did as they were directed. And
giving these directions to his brothers, the king marched towards
Takshyashila and brought that country under his authority.
"About this time there was a Rishi, Ayoda-Dhaumya by name. And Ayoda￾Dhaumya had three disciples, Upamanyu, Aruni, and Veda. And the Rishi
bade one of these disciples, Aruni of Panchala, to go and stop up a breach in
the water-course of a certain field. And Aruni of Panchala, thus ordered by
his preceptor, repaired to the spot. And having gone there he saw that he
could not stop up the breach in the water-course by ordinary means. And he
was distressed because he could not do his preceptor's bidding. But at
length he saw a way and said, 'Well, I will do it in this way.' He then went
down into the breach and lay down himself there. And the water was thus
confined.
"And some time after, the preceptor Ayoda-Dhaumya asked his other
disciples where Aruni of Panchala was. And they answered, 'Sir, he hath
been sent by yourself saying, 'Go, stop up the breach in the water-course of
the field,' Thus reminded, Dhaumya, addressing his pupils, said, 'Then let us
all go to the place where he is.'
"And having arrived there, he shouted, 'Ho Aruni of Panchala! Where art
thou? Come hither, my child.' And Aruni hearing the voice of his preceptor
speedily came out of the water-course and stood before his preceptor. And
addressing the latter, Aruni said, 'Here I am in the breach of the water￾course. Not having been able to devise any other means, I entered myself
for the purpose of preventing the water running out. It is only upon hearing
thy voice that, having left it and allowed the waters to escape, I have stood
before thee. I salute thee, Master; tell me what I have to do.'
"The preceptor, thus addressed, replied, 'Because in getting up from the
ditch thou hast opened the water-course, thenceforth shalt thou be called
Uddalaka as a mark of thy preceptor's favour. And because my words have
been obeyed by thee, thou shalt obtain good fortune. And all the Vedas shall
shine in thee and all the Dharmasastras also.' And Aruni, thus addressed by
his preceptor, went to the country after his heart.
"The name of another of Ayoda-Dhaumya's disciples was Upamanyu. And
Dhaumya appointed him saying, 'Go, my child, Upamanyu, look after the
kine.' And according to his preceptor's orders, he went to tend the kine. And
having watched them all day, he returned in the evening to his preceptor's
house and standing before him he saluted him respectfully. And his
preceptor seeing him in good condition of body asked him, 'Upamanyu, my
child, upon what dost thou support thyself? Thou art exceedingly plump.'
And he answered, 'Sir, I support myself by begging'. And his preceptor said,
'What is obtained in alms should not be used by thee without offering it to
me.' And Upamanyu, thus told, went away. And having obtained alms, he
offered the same to his preceptor. And his preceptor took from him even the
whole. And Upamanyu, thus treated, went to attend the cattle. And having
watched them all day, he returned in the evening to his preceptor's abode.
And he stood before his preceptor and saluted him with respect. And his
preceptor perceiving that he still continued to be of good condition of body
said unto him, 'Upamanyu, my child, I take from thee even the whole of
what thou obtainest in alms, without leaving anything for thee. How then
dost thou, at present, contrive to support thyself?' And Upamanyu said unto
his preceptor, 'Sir, having made over to you all that I obtain in alms, I go a￾begging a second time for supporting myself.' And his preceptor then
replied, 'This is not the way in which thou shouldst obey the preceptor. By
this thou art diminishing the support of others that live by begging. Truly
having supported thyself so, thou hast proved thyself covetous.' And
Upamanyu, having signified his assent to all that his preceptor said, went
away to attend the cattle. And having watched them all day, he returned to
his preceptor's house. And he stood before his preceptor and saluted him
respectfully. And his preceptor observing that he was still fat, said again
unto him, 'Upamanyu, my child, I take from thee all thou obtainest in alms
and thou dost not go a-begging a second time, and yet art thou in healthy
condition. How dost thou support thyself?' And Upamanyu, thus
questioned, answered, 'Sir, I now live upon the milk of these cows.' And his
preceptor thereupon told him, 'It is not lawful for thee to appropriate the
milk without having first obtained my consent.' And Upamanyu having
assented to the justice of these observations, went away to tend the kine.
And when he returned to his preceptor's abode, he stood before him and
saluted him as usual. And his preceptor seeing that he was still fat, said,
'Upamanyu, my child, thou eatest no longer of alms, nor dost thou go a￾begging a second time, not even drinkest of the milk; yet art thou fat. By
what means dost thou contrive to live now? And Upamanyu replied, 'Sir, I
now sip the froth that these calves throw out, while sucking their mother's
teats.' And the preceptor said, 'These generous calves, I suppose, out of
compassion for thee, throw out large quantities of froth. Wouldst thou stand
in the way of their full meals by acting as thou hast done? Know that it is
unlawful for thee to drink the froth.' And Upamanyu, having signified his
assent to this, went as before to tend the cows. And restrained by his
preceptor, he feedeth not on alms, nor hath he anything else to eat; he
drinketh not of the milk, nor tasteth he of the froth!
"And Upamanyu, one day, oppressed by hunger, when in a forest, ate of the
leaves of the Arka (Asclepias gigantea). And his eyes being affected by the
pungent, acrimonious, crude, and saline properties of the leaves which he
had eaten, he became blind. And as he was crawling about, he fell into a pit.
And upon his not returning that day when the sun was sinking down behind
the summit of the western mountains, the preceptor observed to his
disciples that Upamanyu was not yet come. And they told him that he had
gone out with the cattle.
"The preceptor then said, 'Upamanyu being restrained by me from the use
of everything, is, of course, and therefore, doth not come home until it be
late. Let us then go in search of him.' And having said this, he went with his
disciples into the forest and began to shout, saying, 'Ho Upamanyu, where
art thou?' And Upamanyu hearing his preceptor's voice answered in a loud
tone, 'Here I am at the bottom of a well.' And his preceptor asked him how
he happened to be there. And Upamanyu replied, 'Having eaten of the
leaves of the Arka plant I became blind, and so have I fallen into this well.'
And his preceptor thereupon told him, 'Glorify the twin Aswins, the joint
physicians of the gods, and they will restore thee thy sight.' And Upamanyu
thus directed by his preceptor began to glorify the twin Aswins, in the
following words of the Rig Veda:
'Ye have existed before the creation! Ye first-born beings, ye are displayed
in this wondrous universe of five elements! I desire to obtain you by the
help of the knowledge derived from hearing, and of meditation, for ye are
Infinite! Ye are the course itself of Nature and intelligent Soul that pervades
that course! Ye are birds of beauteous feathers perched on the body that is
like to a tree! Ye are without the three common attributes of every soul! Ye
are incomparable! Ye, through your spirit in every created thing, pervade
the Universe!
"Ye are golden Eagles! Ye are the essence into which all things disappear!
Ye are free from error and know no deterioration! Ye are of beauteous beaks
that would not unjustly strike and are victorious in every encounter! Ye
certainly prevail over time! Having created the sun, ye weave the wondrous
cloth of the year by means of the white thread of the day and the black
thread of the night! And with the cloth so woven, ye have established two
courses of action appertaining respectively to the Devas and the Pitris. The
bird of Life seized by Time which represents the strength of the Infinite
soul, ye set free for delivering her unto great happiness! They that are in
deep ignorance, as long as they are under delusions of their senses, suppose
you, who are independent of the attributes of matter, to be gifted with form!
Three hundred and sixty cows represented by three hundred and sixty days
produce one calf between them which is the year. That calf is the creator
and destroyer of all. Seekers of truth following different routes, draw the
milk of true knowledge with its help. Ye Aswins, ye are the creators of that
calf!
"The year is but the nave of a wheel to which is attached seven hundred and
twenty spokes representing as many days and nights. The circumference of
this wheel represented by twelve months is without end. This wheel is full
of delusions and knows no deterioration. It affects all creatures whether to
this or of the other worlds. Ye Aswins, this wheel of time is set in motion by
you!
"The wheel of Time as represented by the year has a nave represented by
the six seasons. The number of spokes attached to that nave is twelve as
represented by the twelve signs of the Zodiac. This wheel of Time
manifests the fruits of the acts of all things. The presiding deities of Time
abide in that wheel. Subject as I am to its distressful influence, ye Aswins,
liberate me from that wheel of Time. Ye Aswins, ye are this universe of five
elements! Ye are the objects that are enjoyed in this and in the other world!
Make me independent of the five elements! And though ye are the Supreme
Brahma, yet ye move over the Earth in forms enjoying the delights that the
senses afford.
"In the beginning, ye created the ten points of the universe! Then have ye
placed the Sun and the Sky above! The Rishis, according to the course of
the same Sun, perform their sacrifices, and the gods and men, according to
what hath been appointed for them, perform their sacrifices also enjoying
the fruits of those acts!
"Mixing the three colours, ye have produced all the objects of sight! It is
from these objects that the Universe hath sprung whereon the gods and men
are engaged in their respective occupations, and, indeed, all creatures
endued with life!
"Ye Aswins, I adore you! I also adore the Sky which is your handiwork! Ye
are the ordainers of the fruits of all acts from which even the gods are not
free! Ye are yourselves free from the fruits of your acts!
"Ye are the parents of all! As males and females it is ye that swallow the
food which subsequently develops into the life creating fluid and blood!
The new-born infant sucks the teat of its mother. Indeed it is ye that take the
shape of the infant! Ye Aswins, grant me my sight to protect my life!"
The twin Aswins, thus invoked, appeared and said, 'We are satisfied. Here is
a cake for thee. Take and eat it.' And Upamanyu thus addressed, replied,
'Your words, O Aswins, have never proved untrue. But without first
offering this cake to my preceptor I dare not take it.' And the Aswins
thereupon told him, 'Formerly, thy preceptor had invoked us. We thereupon
gave him a cake like this; and he took it without offering it to his master. Do
thou do that which thy preceptor did.' Thus addressed, Upamanyu again
said unto them, 'O Aswins, I crave your pardon. Without offering it to my
preceptor I dare not apply this cake.' The Aswins then said, 'O, we are
pleased with this devotion of thine to thy preceptor. Thy master's teeth are
of black iron. Thine shall be of gold. Thou shall be restored to sight and
shall have good fortune.'
"Thus spoken to by the Aswins he recovered his sight, and having gone to
his preceptor's presence he saluted him and told him all. And his preceptor
was well-pleased with him and said unto him, 'Thou shalt obtain prosperity
even as the Aswins have said. All the Vedas shall shine in thee and all the
Dharma-sastras.' And this was the trial of Upamanyu.
"Then Veda the other disciple of Ayoda-Dhaumya was called. His preceptor
once addressed him, saying, 'Veda, my child, tarry some time in my house
and serve thy preceptor. It shall be to thy profit.' And Veda having signified
his assent tarried long in the family of his preceptor mindful of serving him.
Like an ox under the burthens of his master, he bore heat and cold, hunger
and thirst, at all times without a murmur. And it was not long before his
preceptor was satisfied. And as a consequence of that satisfaction, Veda
obtained good fortune and universal knowledge. And this was the trial of
Veda.
"And Veda, having received permission from his preceptor, and leaving the
latter's residence after the completion of his studies, entered the domestic
mode of life. And while living in his own house, he got three pupils. And he
never told them to perform any work or to obey implicitly his own behests;
for having himself experienced much woe while abiding in the family of his
preceptor, he liked not to treat them with severity.
"After a certain time, Janamejaya and Paushya, both of the order of
Kshatriyas, arriving at his residence appointed the Brahman. Veda, as their
spiritual guide (Upadhyaya). And one day while about to depart upon some
business related to a sacrifice, he employed one of his disciples, Utanka, to
take charge of his household. 'Utanka', said he, 'whatsoever should have to
be done in my house, let it be done by thee without neglect.' And having
given these orders to Utanka, he went on his journey.
"So Utanka always mindful of the injunction of his preceptor took up his
abode in the latter's house. And while Utanka was residing there, the
females of his preceptor's house having assembled addressed him and said,
'O Utanka, thy mistress is in that season when connubial connection might
be fruitful. The preceptor is absent; then stand thou in his place and do the
needful.' And Utanka, thus addressed, said unto those women, 'It is not
proper for me to do this at the bidding of women. I have not been enjoined
by my preceptor to do aught that is improper.'
"After a while, his preceptor returned from his journey. And his preceptor
having learnt all that had happened, became well-pleased and, addressing
Utanka, said, 'Utanka, my child, what favour shall I bestow on thee? I have
been served by thee duly; therefore hath our friendship for each other
increased. I therefore grant thee leave to depart. Go thou, and let thy wishes
be accomplished!'
"Utanka, thus addressed, replied, saying, "Let me do something that you
wish, for it hath been said, 'He who bestoweth instruction contrary to usage
and he who receiveth it contrary to usage, one of the two dieth, and enmity
springeth up between the two.--I, therefore, who have received thy leave to
depart, am desirous of bringing thee some honorarium due to a preceptor.
His master, upon hearing this, replied, 'Utanka, my child, wait a while.'
Sometime after, Utanka again addressed his preceptor, saying, 'Command
me to bring that for honorarium, which you desire.' And his preceptor then
said, 'My dear Utanka, thou hast often told me of your desire to bring
something by way of acknowledgment for the instruction thou hast
received. Go then in and ask thy mistress what thou art to bring. And bring
thou that which she directs.' And thus directed by his preceptor Utanka
addressed his preceptress, saying, 'Madam, I have obtained my master's
leave to go home, and I am desirous of bringing something agreeable to
thee as honorarium for the instruction I have received, in order that I may
not depart as his debtor. Therefore, please command me what I am to bring.'
Thus addressed, his preceptress replied, 'Go unto King Paushya and beg of
him the pair of ear-rings worn by his Queen, and bring them hither. The
fourth day hence is a sacred day when I wish to appear before the
Brahmanas (who may dine at my house) decked with these ear-rings. Then
accomplish this, O Utanka! If thou shouldst succeed, good fortune shall
attend thee; if not, what good canst thou expect?'
"Utanka thus commanded, took his departure. And as he was passing along
the road he saw a bull of extraordinary size and a man of uncommon stature
mounted thereon. And that man addressed Utanka and said, 'Eat thou of the
dung of this bull.' Utanka, however, was unwilling to comply. The man said
again, 'O Utanka, eat of it without scrutiny. Thy master ate of it before.' And
Utanka signified his assent and ate of the dung and drank of the urine of
that bull, and rose respectfully, and washing his hands and mouth went to
where King Paushya was.
'On arriving at the palace, Utanka saw Paushya seated (on his throne). And
approaching him Utanka saluted the monarch by pronouncing blessings and
said, 'I am come as a petitioner to thee.' And King Paushya, having returned
Utanka's salutations, said, 'Sir, what shall I do for thee?' And Utanka said, 'I
came to beg of thee a pair of ear-rings as a present to my preceptor. It
behoveth thee to give me the ear-rings worn by the Queen.'
"King Paushya replied, 'Go, Utanka, into the female apartments where the
Queen is and demand them of her.' And Utanka went into the women's
apartments. But as he could not discover the Queen, he again addressed the
king, saying, 'It is not proper that I should be treated by thee with deceit.
Thy Queen is not in the private apartments, for I could not find her.' The
king thus addressed, considered for a while and replied, 'Recollect, Sir, with
attention whether thou art not in a state of defilement in consequence of
contact with the impurities of a repast. My Queen is a chaste wife and
cannot be seen by any one who is impure owing to contact with the leavings
of a repast. Nor doth she herself appear in sight of any one who is defiled.'
"Utanka, thus informed, reflected for a while and then said, 'Yes, it must be
so. Having been in a hurry I performed my ablutions (after meal) in a
standing posture.' King Paushya then said, 'Here is a transgression,
purification is not properly effected by one in a standing posture, not by one
while he is going along.' And Utanka having agreed to this, sat down with
his face towards the east, and washed his face, hands, and feet thoroughly.
And he then, without a noise, sipped thrice of water free from scum and
froth, and not warm, and just sufficient to reach his stomach and wiped his
face twice. And he then touched with water the apertures of his organs
(eyes, ears, etc.). And having done all this, he once more entered the
apartments of the women. And this time he saw the Queen. And as the
Queen perceived him, she saluted him respectfully and said, 'Welcome, Sir,
command me what I have to do.' And Utanka said unto her, 'It behoveth
thee to give me those ear-rings of thine. I beg them as a present for my
preceptor.' And the Queen having been highly pleased with Utanka's
conduct and, considering that Utanka as an object of charity could not be
passed over, took off her ear-rings and gave them to him. And she said,
'These ear-rings are very much sought after by Takshaka, the King of the
serpents. Therefore shouldst thou carry them with the greatest care.'
"And Utanka being told this, said unto the Queen, 'Lady, be under no
apprehension. Takshaka, Chief of the serpents, is not able to overtake me.'
And having said this, and taking leave of the Queen, he went back into the
presence of Paushya, and said, 'Paushya, I am gratified.' Then Paushya said
to Utanka, 'A fit object of charity can only be had at long intervals. Thou art
a qualified guest, therefore do I desire to perform a sraddha. Tarry thou a
little. And Utanka replied, 'Yes, I will tarry, and beg that the clean
provisions that are ready may be soon brought in.' And the king having
signified his assent, entertained Utanka duly. And Utanka seeing that the
food placed before him had hair in it, and also that it was cold, thought it
unclean. And he said unto Paushya, 'Thou givest me food that is unclean,
therefore shalt thou lose thy sight.' And Paushya in answer said, 'And
because dost thou impute uncleanliness to food that is clean, therefore shalt
thou be without issue.' And Utanka thereupon rejoined, 'It behoveth thee
not, after having offered me unclean food, to curse me in return. Satisfy
thyself by ocular proof.'
"And Paushya seeing the food alleged to be unclean satisfied himself of its
uncleanliness. And Paushya having ascertained that the food was truly
unclean, being cold and mixed with hair, prepared as it was by a woman
with unbraided hair, began to pacify the Rishi Utanka, saying, 'Sir, the food
placed before thee is cold, and doth contain hair, having been prepared
without sufficient care. Therefore I pray thee pardon me. Let me not
become blind.' And Utanka answered, 'What I say must come to pass.
Having become blind, thou mayst, however, recover the sight before long.
Grant that thy curse also doth not take effect on me.' And Paushya said unto
him, 'I am unable to revoke my curse. For my wrath even now hath not been
appeased. But thou knowest not this. For a Brahmana's heart is soft as new￾churned butter, even though his words bear a sharp-edged razor. It is
otherwise in respect of these with the Kshatriya. His words are soft as new￾churned butter, but his heart is like a sharp-edged tool, such being the case,
I am unable, because of the hardness of my heart, to neutralise my curse.
Then go thou thy own way.' To this Utanka made answer, "I showed thee
the uncleanliness of the food offered to me, and I was even now pacified by
thee. Besides, saidst thou at first that because I imputed uncleanliness to
food that was clean I should be without issue. But the food truly unclean,
thy curse cannot affect me. Of this I am sure.' And Utanka having said this
departed with the ear-rings.
"On the road Utanka perceived coming towards him a naked idle beggar
sometimes coming in view and sometimes disappearing. And Utanka put
the ear-rings on the ground and went for water. In the meantime the beggar
came quickly to the spot and taking up the ear-rings ran away. And Utanka
having completed his ablutions in water and purified himself and having
also reverently bowed down to the gods and his spiritual masters pursued
the thief with the utmost speed. And having with great difficulty overtaken
him, he seized him by force. But at that instant the person seized, quitting
the form of a beggar and assuming his real form, viz., that of Takshaka,
speedily entered a large hole open in the ground. And having got in,
Takshaka proceeded to his own abode, the region of the serpents.
"Now, Utanka, recollecting the words of the Queen, pursued the Serpent,
and began to dig open the hole with a stick but was unable to make much
progress. And Indra beholding his distress sent his thunder-bolt (Vajra) to
his assistance. Then the thunder-bolt entering that stick enlarged that hole.
And Utanka began to enter the hole after the thunder-bolt. And having
entered it, he beheld the region of the serpents infinite in extent, filled with
hundreds of palaces and elegant mansions with turrets and domes and gate￾ways, abounding with wonderful places for various games and
entertainments. And Utanka then glorified the serpents by the following
slokas:
"Ye Serpents, subjects of King Airavata, splendid in battle and showering
weapons in the field like lightning-charged clouds driven by the winds!
Handsome and of various forms and decked with many coloured ear-rings,
ye children of Airavata, ye shine like the Sun in the firmament! On the
northern banks of the Ganges are many habitations of serpents. There I
constantly adore the great serpents. Who except Airavata would desire to
move in the burning rays of the Sun? When Dhritarashtra (Airavata's
brother) goes out, twenty-eight thousand and eight serpents follow him as
his attendants. Ye who move near him and ye who stay at a distance from
him, I adore all of you that have Airavata for your elder brother.
"I adore thee also, to obtain the ear-rings, O Takshaka, who formerly dwelt
in Kurukshetra and the forest of Khandava! Takshaka and Aswasena, ye are
constant companions who dwell in Kurukshetra on the banks of the
Ikshumati! I also adore the illustrious Srutasena, the younger brother of
Takshaka, who resided at the holy place called Mahadyumna with a view to
obtaining the chiefship of the serpents.
"The Brahmana Rishi Utanka having saluted the chief serpents in this
manner, obtained not, however, the ear-rings. And he thereupon became
very thoughtful. And when he saw that he obtained not the ear-rings even
though he had adored the serpents, he then looked about him and beheld
two women at a loom weaving a piece of cloth with a fine shuttle; and in
the loom were black and white threads. And he likewise saw a wheel, with
twelve spokes, turned by six boys. And he also saw a man with a handsome
horse. And he began to address them the following mantras:
"This wheel whose circumference is marked by twenty-four divisions
representing as many lunar changes is furnished with three hundred spokes!
It is set in continual motion by six boys (the seasons)! These damsels
representing universal nature are weaving without intermission a cloth with
threads black and white, and thereby ushering into existence the manifold
worlds and the beings that inhabit them! Thou wielder of the thunder, the
protector of the universe, the slayer of Vritra and Namuchi, thou illustrious
one who wearest the black cloth and displayest truth and untruth in the
universe, thou who ownest for thy carrier the horse which was received
from the depths of the ocean, and which is but another form of Agni (the
god of fire), I bow to thee, thou supreme Lord, thou Lord of the three
worlds, O Purandara!'
"Then the man with the horse said unto Utanka, 'I am gratified by this thy
adoration. What good shall I do to thee?' And Utanka replied, 'Even let the
serpents be brought under my control.' Then the man rejoined, 'Blow into
this horse.' And Utanka blew into that horse. And from the horse thus
blown into, there issued, from every aperture of his body, flames of fire
with smoke by which the region of the Nagas was about to be consumed.
And Takshaka, surprised beyond measure and terrified by the heat of the
fire, hastily came out of his abode taking the ear-rings with him, and said
unto Utanka, 'Pray, Sir, take back the ear-rings.' And Utanka took them
back.
"But Utanka having recovered his ear-rings thought, 'O, this is that sacred
day of my preceptress. I am at a distance. How can I, therefore, show my
regard for her? And when Utanka was anxious about this, the man
addressed him and said, 'Ride this horse, Utanka, and he will in a moment
carry thee to thy master's abode.' And Utanka having signified his assent,
mounted the horse and presently reached his preceptor's house.
"And his preceptress that morning after having bathed was dressing her hair
sitting, thinking of uttering a curse on Utanka if he should not return within
time. But, in the meantime, Utanka entered his preceptor's abode and paid
his respects to his preceptress and presented her the ear-rings. 'Utanka', said
she, 'thou hast arrived at the proper time at the proper place. Welcome, my
child; thou art innocent and therefore I do not curse thee! Good fortune is
even before thee. Let thy wishes be crowned with success!'
"Then Utanka waited on his preceptor. And his preceptor said, 'Thou art
welcome! What hath occasioned thy long absence?' And Utanka replied to
his preceptor, 'Sir, in the execution of this my business obstruction was
offered by Takshaka, the King of serpents. Therefore I had to go to the
region of the Nagas. There I saw two damsels sitting at a loom, weaving a
fabric with black and white threads. Pray, what is that? There likewise I
beheld a wheel with twelve spokes ceaselessly turned by six boys. What too
doth that import? Who is also the man that I saw? And what the horse of
extraordinary size likewise beheld by me? And when I was on the road I
also saw a bull with a man mounted thereon, by whom I was endearingly
accosted thus, 'Utanka, eat of the dung of this bull, which was also eaten by
thy master?' So I ate of the dung of that bull according to his words. Who
also is he? Therefore, enlightened by thee, I desire to hear all about them.'
"And his preceptor thus addressed said unto him, 'The two damsels thou
hast seen are Dhata and Vidhata; the black and white threads denote night
and day; the wheel of twelve spokes turned by the six boys signified the
year comprising six seasons. The man is Parjanya, the deity of rain, and the
horse is Agni, the god of fire. The bull that thou hast seen on the road is
Airavata, the king of elephants; the man mounted thereon is Indra; and the
dung of the bull which was eaten by thee was Amrita. It was certainly for
this (last) that thou hast not met with death in the region of the Nagas; and
Indra who is my friend having been mercifully inclined showed thee favour.
It is for this that thou returnest safe, with the ear-rings about thee. Then, O
thou amiable one, I give thee leave to depart. Thou shall obtain good
fortune.'
"And Utanka, having obtained his master's leave, moved by anger and
resolved to avenge himself on Takshaka, proceeded towards Hastinapura.
That excellent Brahmana soon reached Hastinapura. And Utanka then
waited upon King Janamejaya who had some time before returned
victorious from Takshashila. And Utanka saw the victorious monarch
surrounded on all sides by his ministers. And he pronounced benedictions
on him in a proper form. And Utanka addressed the monarch at the proper
moment in speech of correct accent and melodious sounds, saying, 'O thou
the best of monarchs! How is it that thou spendest thy time like a child
when there is another matter that urgently demandeth thy attention?'"
"Sauti said, 'The monarch Janamejaya, thus addressed, saluting that
excellent Brahmana replied unto him, 'In cherishing these my subjects I do
discharge the duties of my noble tribe. Say, what is that business to be done
by me and which hath brought thee hither.'
"The foremost of Brahmanas and distinguished beyond all for good deeds,
thus addressed by the excellent monarch of large heart, replied unto him, 'O
King! the business is thy own that demandeth thy attention; therefore do it,
please. O thou King of kings! Thy father was deprived of life by Takshaka;
therefore do thou avenge thy father's death on that vile serpent. The time
hath come, I think, for the act of vengeance ordained by the Fates. Go then
avenge the death of thy magnanimous father who, being bitten without
cause by that vile serpent, was reduced to five elements even like a tree
stricken by thunder. The wicked Takshaka, vilest of the serpent race,
intoxicated with power committed an unnecessary act when he bit the King,
that god-like father, the protector of the race of royal saints. Wicked in his
deeds, he even caused Kasyapa (the prince of physicians) to run back when
he was coming for the relief of thy father. It behoveth thee to burn the
wicked wretch in the blazing fire of a snake-sacrifice. O King! Give instant
orders for the sacrifice. It is thus thou canst avenge the death of thy father.
And a very great favour shall have also been shown to me. For by that
malignant wretch, O virtuous Prince, my business also was, on one
occasion, obstructed, while proceeding on account of my preceptor."
"Sauti continued, The monarch, having heard these words, was enraged
with Takshaka. By the speech of Utanka was inflamed the prince, even as
the sacrificial fire with clarified butter. Moved by grief also, in the presence
of Utanka, the prince asked his ministers the particulars of his father's
journey to the regions of the blessed. And when he heard all about the
circumstances of his father's death from the lips of Utanka, he was
overcome with pain and sorrow.
And thus endeth the section called Paushya of the Adi Parva of the blessed
Mahabharata."
*****
Pauloma Parva
Section 4
'UGRASRAVA SAUTI, the son of Lomaharshana, versed in the Puranas,
while present in the forest of Naimisha, at the twelve years' sacrifice of
Saunaka, surnamed Kulapati, stood before the Rishis in attendance. Having
studied Puranas with meticulous devotion and thus being thoroughly
acquainted with them, he addressed them with joined hands thus, 'I have
graphically described to you the history of Utanka which is one of the
causes of King Janamejaya's Snake-sacrifice. What, revered Sirs, do ye
wish to hear now? What shall I relate to you?' The holy men replied, 'O son
of Lomaharshana, we shall ask thee about what we are anxious to hear and
thou wilt recount the tales one by one. Saunaka, our revered master, is at
present attending the apartment of the holy fire. He is acquainted with those
divine stories which relate to the gods and asuras. He adequately knoweth
the histories of men, serpents, and Gandharvas. Further, O Sauti, in this
sacrifice that learned Brahmana is the chief. He is able, faithful to his vows,
wise, a master of the Sastras and the Aranyaka, a speaker of truth, a lover of
peace, a mortifier of the flesh, and an observer of the penances according to
the authoritative decrees. He is respected by us all. It behoveth us therefore
to wait for him. And when he is seated on his highly respected seat, thou
wilt answer what that best of Dwijas shall ask of thee.'
"Sauti said, 'Be it so. And when the high-souled master hath been seated I
shall narrate, questioned by him, sacred stories on a variety of subjects."
After a while that excellent Brahmana (Saunaka) having duly finished all
his duties, and having propitiated the gods with prayers and the manes with
oblations of water, came back to the place of sacrifice, where with Sauti
seated before was the assembly of saints of rigid vows sitting at ease. And
when Saunaka was seated in the midst of the Ritwiks and Sadhyas, who
were also in their seats, he spake as followeth."
Section 5
"Saunaka said, 'Child, thy father formerly read the whole of the Puranas, O
son of Lomaharshana, and the Bharata with Krishna-Dwaipayana. Hast thou
also made them thy study? In those ancient records are chronicled
interesting stories and the history of the first generations of the wise men,
all of which we heard being rehearsed by thy sire. In the first place, I am
desirous of hearing the history of the race of Bhrigu. Recount thou that
history, we shall attentively listen to thee."
"Sauti answered, 'By me hath been acquired all that was formerly studied
by the high-souled Brahmanas including Vaisampayana and repeated by
them; by me hath been acquired all that had been studied by my father. O
descendant of the Bhrigu race, attend then to so much as relateth to the
exalted race of Bhrigu, revered by Indra and all the gods, by the tribes of
Rishis and Maruts (Winds). O great Muni, I shall first properly recount the
story of this family, as told in the Puranas.
"The great and blessed saint Bhrigu, we are informed, was produced by the
self-existing Brahma from the fire at the sacrifice of Varuna. And Bhrigu
had a son, named Chyavana, whom he dearly loved. And to Chyavana was
born a virtuous son called Pramati. And Pramati had a son named Ruru by
Ghritachi (the celestial dancer). And to Ruru also by his wife Pramadvara,
was born a son, whose name was Sunaka. He was, O Saunaka, thy great
ancestor exceedingly virtuous in his ways. He was devoted to asceticism, of
great reputation, proficient in law, and eminent among those having a
knowledge of the Vedas. He was virtuous, truthful, and of well-regulated
fare.'
"Saunaka said, 'O son of Suta, I ask thee why the illustrious son of Bhrigu
was named Chyavana. Do tell me all.'
"Sauti replied, 'Bhrigu had a wife named Puloma whom he dearly loved.
She became big with child by Bhrigu. And one day while the virtuous
continent Puloma was in that condition, Bhrigu, great among those that are
true to their religion, leaving her at home went out to perform his ablutions.
It was then that the Rakshasa called Puloma came to Bhrigu's abode. And
entering the Rishi's abode, the Rakshasa saw the wife of Bhrigu,
irreproachable in everything. And seeing her he became filled with lust and
lost his senses. The beautiful Puloma entertained the Rakshasa thus arrived,
with roots and fruits of the forest. And the Rakshasa who burnt with desire
upon seeing her, became very much delighted and resolved, O good sage, to
carry her away who was so blameless in every respect.
'My design is accomplished,' said the Rakshasa, and so seizing that
beautiful matron he carried her away. And, indeed, she of agreeable smiles,
had been betrothed by her father himself, to him, although the former
subsequently bestowed her, according to due rites, on Bhrigu. O thou of the
Bhrigu race, this wound rankled deep in the Rakshasa's mind and he
thought the present moment very opportune for carrying the lady away.
"And the Rakshasa saw the apartment in which the sacrificial fire was kept
burning brightly. The Rakshasa then asked the flaming element 'Tell me, O
Agni, whose wife this woman rightfully is. Thou art the mouth of gods;
therefore thou art bound to answer my question. This lady of superior
complexion had been first accepted by me as wife, but her father
subsequently bestowed her on the false Bhrigu. Tell me truly if this fair one
can be regarded as the wife of Bhrigu, for having found her alone, I have
resolved to take her away by force from the hermitage. My heart burneth
with rage when I reflect that Bhrigu hath got possession of this woman of
slender waist, first betrothed to me.'"
"Sauti continued, 'In this manner the Rakshasa asked the flaming god of fire
again and again whether the lady was Bhrigu's wife. And the god was afraid
to return an answer. 'Thou, O god of fire,' said he, residest constantly within
every creature, as witness of her or his merits and demerits. O thou
respected one, then answer my question truly. Has not Bhrigu appropriated
her who was chosen by me as my wife? Thou shouldst declare truly
whether, therefore, she is my wife by first choice. After thy answer as to
whether she is the wife of Bhrigu, I will bear her away from this hermitage
even in sight of thee. Therefore answer thou truly.'"
"Sauti continued, 'The Seven flamed god having heard these words of the
Rakshasa became exceedingly distressed, being afraid of telling a falsehood
and equally afraid of Bhrigu's curse. And the god at length made answer in
words that came out slowly. 'This Puloma was, indeed, first chosen by thee,
O Rakshasa, but she was not taken by thee with holy rites and invocations.
But this far-famed lady was bestowed by her father on Bhrigu as a gift from
desire of blessing. She was not bestowed on thee O Rakshasa, this lady was
duly made by the Rishi Bhrigu his wife with Vedic rites in my presence.
This is she--I know her. I dare not speak a falsehood. O thou best of the
Rakshasas, falsehood is never respected in this world.'"
Section 6
"Sauti said, 'O Brahmana, having heard these words from the god of fire,
the Rakshasa assumed the form of a boar, and seizing the lady carried her
away with the speed of the wind--even of thought. Then the child of Bhrigu
lying in her body enraged at such violence, dropped from his mother's
womb, for which he obtained the name of Chyavana. And the Rakshasa
perceiving the infant drop from the mother's womb, shining like the sun,
quitted his grasp of the woman, fell down and was instantly converted into
ashes. And the beautiful Pauloma, distracted with grief, O Brahmana of the
Bhrigu race, took up her offspring Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu and walked
away. And Brahma, the Grandfather of all, himself saw her, the faultless
wife of his son, weeping. And the Grandfather of all comforted her who
was attached to her son. And the drops of tears which rolled down her eyes
formed a great river. And that river began to follow the foot-steps of the
wife of the great ascetic Bhrigu. And the Grandfather of the worlds seeing
that river follow the path of his son's wife gave it a name himself, and he
called it Vadhusara. And it passeth by the hermitage of Chyavana. And in
this manner was born Chyavana of great ascetic power, the son of Bhrigu.
"And Bhrigu saw his child Chyavana and its beautiful mother. And the
Rishi in a rage asked her, 'By whom wast thou made known to that
Rakshasa who resolved to carry thee away? O thou of agreeable smiles, the
Rakshasa could not know thee as my wile. Therefore tell me who it was that
told the Rakshasa so, in order that I may curse him through anger.' And
Pauloma replied, 'O possessor of the six attributes! I was identified to the
Rakshasa by Agni (the god of fire). And he (the Rakshasa) bore me away,
who cried like the Kurari (female osprey). And it was only by the ardent
splendour of this thy son that I was rescued, for the Rakshasa (seeing this
infant) let me go and himself falling to the ground was turned into ashes.'
"Sauti continued, 'Bhrigu, upon hearing this account from Pauloma, became
exceedingly enraged. And in excess of passion the Rishi cursed Agni,
saying, 'Thou shalt eat of all things.'"
So ends the sixth section called "the curse on Agni" in the Adi Parva.
Section 7
"Sauti said, 'the god of fire enraged at the curse of Bhrigu, thus addressed
the Rishi, 'What meaneth this rashness, O Brahmana, that thou hast
displayed towards me? What transgression can be imputed to me who was
labouring to do justice and speak the truth impartially? Being asked I gave
the true answer. A witness who when interrogated about a fact of which he
hath knowledge, representeth otherwise than it is, ruineth his ancestors and
descendants both to the seventh generation. He, too, who, being fully
cognisant of all the particulars of an affair, doth not disclose what he
knoweth, when asked, is undoubtedly stained with guilt. I can also curse
thee, but Brahmanas are held by me in high respect. Although these are
known to thee, O Brahmana, I will yet speak of them, so please attend!
Having, by ascetic power, multiplied myself, I am present in various forms,
in places of the daily homa, at sacrifices extending for years, in places
where holy rites are performed (such as marriage, etc.), and at other
sacrifices. With the butter that is poured upon my flame according to the
injunctions prescribed in the Vedas, the Devas and the Pitris are appeased.
The Devas are the waters; the Pitris are also the waters. The Devas have
with the Pitris an equal right to the sacrifices called Darshas and
Purnamasas. The Devas therefore are the Pitris and the Pitris, the Devas.
They are identical beings, worshipped together and also separately at the
changes of the moon. The Devas and the Pitris eat what is poured upon me.
I am therefore called the mouth of the Devas and the Pitris. At the new
moon the Pitris, and at the full moon the Devas, are fed through my mouth,
eating of the clarified butter that is poured on me. Being, as I am, their
mouth, how am I to be an eater of all things (clean and unclean)?
"Then Agni, alter reflecting for a while, withdrew himself from all places;
from places of the daily homa of the Brahmanas, from all long-extending
sacrifices, from places of holy rites, and from other ceremonies. Without
their Oms and Vashats, and deprived of their Swadhas and Swahas
(sacrificial mantras during offerings), the whole body of creatures became
much distressed at the loss of their (sacrificial) fire. The Rishis in great
anxiety went to the gods and addressed them thus, 'Ye immaculate beings!
The three regions of the universe are confounded at the cessation of their
sacrifices and ceremonies in consequence of the loss of fire! Ordain what is
to be done in tins matter, so that there may be no loss of time.' Then the
Rishis and the gods went together to the presence of Brahma. And they
represented to him all about the curse on Agni and the consequent
interruption of all ceremonies. And they said, 'O thou greatly fortunate!
Once Agni hath been cursed by Bhrigu for some reason. Indeed, being the
mouth of the gods and also the first who eateth of what is offered in
sacrifices, the eater also of the sacrificial butter, how will Agni be reduced
to the condition of one who eateth of all things promiscuously?' And the
creator of the universe hearing these words of theirs summoned Agni to his
presence. And Brahma addressed Agni, the creator of all and eternal as
himself, in these gentle words, 'Thou art the creator of the worlds and thou
art their destroyer! Thou preserves! the three worlds and thou art the
promoter of all sacrifices and ceremonies! Therefore behave thyself so that
ceremonies be not interrupted. And, O thou eater of the sacrificial butter,
why dost thou act so foolishly, being, as thou art, the Lord of all? Thou
alone art always pure in the universe and thou art its stay! Thou shall not,
with all thy body, be reduced to the state of one who eateth of all things
promiscuously. O thou of flames, the flame that is in thy viler parts shall
alone eat of all things alike. The body of thine which eateth of flesh (being
in the stomach of all carnivorous animals) shall also eat of all things
promiscuously. And as every thing touched by the sun's rays becometh
pure, so shall everything be pure that shall be burnt by thy flames. Thou art,
O fire, the supreme energy born of thy own power. Then, O Lord, by that
power of thine make the Rishi's curse come true. Continue to 'receive thy
own portion and that of the gods, offered at thy mouth.'
'Sauti continued, 'Then Agni replied to the Grandfather, 'So be it.' And he
then went away to obey the command of the supreme Lord. The gods and
the Rishis also returned in delight to the place whence they had come. And
the Rishis began to perform as before their ceremonies and sacrifices. And
the gods in heaven and all creatures of the world rejoiced exceedingly. And
Agni too rejoiced in that he was free from the prospect of sin.
"Thus, O possessor of the six attributes, had Agni been cursed in the days of
yore by Bhrigu. And such is the ancient history connected with the
destruction of the Rakshasa, Pauloma and the birth of Chyavana.'"
Thus endeth the seventh section of the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva of
the blessed Mahabharata.
Section 8
"Sauti said, 'O Brahmana, Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu, begot a son in the
womb of his wife Sukanya. And that son was the illustrious Pramati of
resplendent energy. And Pramati begot in the womb of Ghritachi a son
called Ruru. And Ruru begot on his wife Pramadvara a son called Sunaka.
And I shall relate to you in detail, O Brahmana, the entire history of Ruru of
abundant energy. O listen to it then in full!
"Formerly there was a great Rishi called Sthulakesa possessed of ascetic
power and learning and kindly disposed towards all creatures. At that time,
O Brahmana sage, Viswavasu, the King of the Gandharvas, it is said, had
intimacy with Menaka, the celestial dancing-girl. And the Apsara, Menaka,
O thou of the Bhrigu race, when her time was come, brought forth an infant
near the hermitage of Sthulakesa. And dropping the newborn infant on the
banks of the river, O Brahmana, Menaka, the Apsara, being destitute of pity
and shame, went away. And the Rishi, Sthulakesa, of great ascetic power,
discovered the infant lying forsaken in a lonely part of the river-side. And
he perceived that it was a female child, bright as the offspring of an
Immortal and blazing, as it were, with beauty: And the great Brahmana,
Sthulakesa, the first of Munis, seeing that female child, and filled with
compassion, took it up and reared it. And the lovely child grew up in his
holy habitation, the noble-minded and blessed Rishi Sthulakesa performing
in due succession all the ceremonies beginning with that at birth as ordained
by the divine law. And because she surpassed all of her sex in goodness,
beauty, and every quality, the great Rishi called her by the name of
Pramadvara. And the pious Ruru having seen Pramadvara in the hermitage
of Sthulakesa became one whose heart was pierced by the god of love. And
Ruru by means of his companions made his father Pramati, the son of
Bhrigu, acquainted with his passion. And Pramati demanded her of the far￾famed Sthulakesa for his son. And her foster-father betrothed the virgin
Pramadvara to Ruru, fixing the nuptials for the day when the star Varga￾Daivata (Purva-phalguni) would be ascendant.
"Then within a few days of the time fixed for the nuptials, the beautiful
virgin while at play with companions of her own sex, her time having come,
impelled by fate, trod upon a serpent which she did not perceive as it lay in
coil. And the reptile, urged to execute the will of Fate, violently darted its
envenomed fangs into the body of the heedless maiden. And stung by that
serpent, she instantly dropped senseless on the ground, her colour faded and
all the graces of her person went off. And with dishevelled hair she became
a spectacle of woe to her companions and friends. And she who was so
agreeable to behold became on her death what was too painful to look at.
And the girl of slender waist lying on the ground like one asleep--being
overcome with the poison of the snake-once more became more beautiful
than in life. And her foster-father and the other holy ascetics who were
there, all saw her lying motionless upon the ground with the splendour of a
lotus. And then there came many noted Brahmanas filled with compassion,
and they sat around her. And Swastyatreya, Mahajana, Kushika,
Sankhamekhala, Uddalaka, Katha, and Sweta of great renown, Bharadwaja,
Kaunakutsya, Arshtishena, Gautama, Pramati, and Pramati's son Ruru, and
other inhabitants of the forest, came there. And when they saw that maiden
lying dead on the ground overcome with the poison of the reptile that had
bitten her, they all wept filled with compassion. But Ruru, mortified beyond
measure, retired from the scene.'"
So ends the eighth section of the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva of the
blessed Mahabharata.
Section 9
"Sauti said, 'While those illustrious Brahmanas were sitting around the dead
body of Pramadvara, Ruru, sorely afflicted, retired into a deep wood and
wept aloud. And overwhelmed with grief he indulged in much piteous
lamentation. And, remembering his beloved Pramadvara, he gave vent to
his sorrow in the following words, 'Alas! The delicate fair one that
increaseth my affliction lieth upon the bare ground. What can be more
deplorable to us, her friends? If I have been charitable, if I have performed
acts of penance, if I have ever revered my superiors, let the merit of these
arts restore to life my beloved one! If from my birth I have been controlling
my passions, adhered to my vows, let the fair Pramadvara rise from the
ground.
"And while Ruru was indulging in these lamentations for the loss of his
bride, a messenger from heaven came to him in the forest and addressed
him thus, 'The words thou utterest, O Ruru, in thy affliction are certainly
ineffectual. For, O pious man, one belonging to this world whose days have
run out can never come back to life. This poor child of a Gandharva and
Apsara has had her days run out! Therefore, O child, thou shouldst not
consign thy heart to sorrow. The great gods, however, have provided
beforehand a means of her restoration to life. And if thou compliest with it,
thou mayest receive back thy Pramadvara.'
"And Ruru replied, O messenger of heaven! What is that which the gods
have ordained. Tell me in full so that (on hearing) I may comply with it. It
behoveth thee to deliver me from grief!' And the celestial messenger said
unto Ruru, 'Resign half of thy own life to thy bride, and then, O Ruru of the
race of Bhrigu, thy Pramadvara shall rise from the ground.' 'O best of
celestial messengers, I most willingly offer a moiety of my own life in
favour of my bride. Then let my beloved one rise up once more in her dress
and lovable form.'
"Sauti said, 'Then the king of Gandharvas (the father of Pramadvara) and
the celestial messenger, both of excellent qualities, went to the god Dharma
(the Judge of the dead) and addressed him, saying, 'If it be thy will, O
Dharmaraja, let the amiable Pramadvara, the betrothed wife of Ruru, now
lying dead, rise up with a moiety of Ruru's life.' And Dharmaraja answered,
'O messenger of the gods, if it be thy wish, let Pramadvara, the betrothed
wife of Ruru, rise up endued with a moiety of Ruru's life.'
"Sauti continued, 'And when Dharmaraja had said so, that maiden of
superior complexion, Pramadvara, endued with a moiety of Ruru's life, rose
as from her slumber. This bestowal by Ruru of a moiety of his own span of
life to resuscitate his bride afterwards led, as it would be seen, to a
curtailment of Ruru's life.
"And on an auspicious day their fathers gladly married them with due rites.
And the couple passed their days, devoted to each other. And Ruru having
obtained such a wife, as is hard to be found, beautiful and bright as the
filaments of the lotus, made a vow for the destruction of the serpent-race.
And whenever he saw a serpent he became filled with great wrath and
always killed it with a weapon.
"One day, O Brahmana, Ruru entered an extensive forest. And there he saw
an old serpent of the Dundubha species lying stretched on the ground. And
Ruru thereupon lifted up in anger his staff, even like to the staff of Death,
for the purpose of killing it. Then the Dundubha, addressing Ruru, said, 'I
have done thee no harm, O Brahmana! Then wherefore wilt thou slay me in
anger?'"
So ends the ninth section of the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva of the
blessed Mahabharata.
Section 10
Sauti said, 'And Ruru, on hearing those words, replied, 'My wife, dear to me
as life, was bit by a snake; upon which, I took, O snake, a dreadful vow,
viz., that I would kill every snake that I might come across. Therefore shall
I smite thee and thou shalt be deprived of life.'
"And the Dundubha replied, 'O Brahmana, the snakes that bite man are
quite different in type. It behoveth thee not to slay Dundubhas who are
serpents only in name. Subject like other serpents to the same calamities but
not sharing their good fortune, in woe the same but in joy different, the
Dundubhas should not be slain by thee under any misconception.'
"Sauti continued, 'And the Rishi Ruru hearing these words of the serpent,
and seeing that it was bewildered with fear, albeit a snake of the Dundubha
species, killed it not. And Ruru, the possessor of the six attributes,
comforting the snake addressed it, saying, 'Tell me fully, O snake, who art
thou thus metamorphosed?' And the Dundubha replied, 'O Ruru! I was
formerly a Rishi by name Sahasrapat. And it is by the curse of a Brahmana
that I have been transformed into a snake. And Ruru asked, 'O thou best of
snakes, for what wast thou cursed by a Brahmana in wrath? And how long
also will thy form continue so?'"
And so ends the tenth section of the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 11
"Sauti continued 'The Dundubha then said, 'In former times, I had a friend
Khagama by name. He was impetuous in his speech and possessed of
spiritual power by virtue of his austerities. And one day when he was
engaged in the Agni-hotra (Fire-sacrifice), I made a mock snake of blades
of grass, and in a frolic attempted to frighten him with it. And anon he fell
into a swoon. On recovering his senses, that truth-telling and vow￾observing ascetic, burning with wrath, exclaimed, 'Since thou hast made a
powerless mock snake to frighten me, thou shalt be turned even into a
venomless serpent thyself by my curse.' O ascetic, I well knew the power of
his penances; therefore with an agitated heart, I addressed him thus,
bending low with joined hands, 'Friend, I did this by way of a joke, to excite
thy laughter. It behoveth thee to forgive me and revoke thy curse.' And
seeing me sorely troubled, the ascetic was moved, and he replied, breathing
hot and hard. 'What I have said must come to pass. Listen to what I say and
lay it to thy heart. O pious one! when Ruru the pure son of Pramati, will
appear, thou shall be delivered from the curse the moment thou seest him.
Thou art the very Ruru and the son of Pramati. On regaining my native
form, I will tell thee something for thy good.
"And that illustrious man and the best of Brahmanas then left his snake￾body, and attained his own form and original brightness. He then addressed
the following words to Ruru of incomparable power, 'O thou first of created
beings, verily the highest virtue of man is sparing the life of others.
Therefore a Brahmana should never take the life of any creature. A
Brahmana should ever be mild. This is the most sacred injunction of the
Vedas. A Brahmana should be versed in the Vedas and Vedangas, and
should inspire all creatures with belief in God. He should be benevolent to
all creatures, truthful, and forgiving, even as it is his paramount duty to
retain the Vedas in his memory. The duties of the Kshatriya are not thine. To
be stern, to wield the sceptre and to rule the subjects properly are the duties
of the Kshatriya. Listen, O Ruru, to the account of the destruction of snakes
at the sacrifice of Janamejaya in days of yore, and the deliverance of the
terrified reptiles by that best of Dwijas, Astika, profound in Vedic lore and
might in spiritual energy.'"
And so ends the eleventh section of the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 12
"Sauti continued, 'Ruru then asked, 'O best of Dwijas, why was king
Janamejaya bent upon destroying the serpents?--And why and how were
they saved by the wise Astika? I am anxious to hear all this in detail.'
"The Rishi replied, 'O Ruru, the important history of Astika you will learn
from the lips of Brahmanas.' Saying this, he vanished.
"Sauti continued, 'Ruru ran about in search of the missing Rishi, and having
failed to find him in all the woods, fell down on the ground, fatigued. And
revolving in his mind the words of the Rishi, he was greatly confounded
and seemed to be deprived of his senses. Regaining consciousness, he came
home and asked his father to relate the history in question. Thus asked, his
father related all about the story.'"
So ends the twelfth section in the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva.
*****
Astika Parva
Section 13
"Saunaka said, 'For what reason did that tiger among kings, the royal
Janamejaya, determine to take the lives of the snakes by means of a
sacrifice? O Sauti, tell us in full the true story. Tell us also why Astika, that
best of regenerate ones, that foremost of ascetics, rescued the snakes from
the blazing fire. Whose son was that monarch who celebrated the snake￾sacrifice? And whose son also was that best of regenerate ones?'
"Sauti said, 'O best of speakers, this story of Astika is long. I will duly
relate it in full, O listen!'
"Saunaka said, 'I am desirous of hearing at length the charming story of that
Rishi, that illustrious Brahmana named Astika.'
"Sauti said, 'This history (first) recited by Krishna-Dwaipayana, is called a
Purana by the Brahmanas. It was formerly narrated by my wise father,
Lomaharshana, the disciple of Vyasa, before the dwellers of the Naimisha
forest, at their request. I was present at the recital, and, O Saunaka, since
thou askest me, I shall narrate the history of Astika exactly as I heard it. O
listen, as I recite in full that sin-destroying story.
"The father of Astika was powerful like Prajapati. He was a Brahma-charin,
always engaged in austere devotions. He ate sparingly, was a great ascetic,
and had his lust under complete control. And he was known by the name of
Jaratkaru. That foremost one among the Yayavaras, virtuous and of rigid
vows, highly blessed and endued with great ascetic power, once undertook a
journey over the world. He visited diverse places, bathed in diverse sacred
waters, and rested where night overtook him. Endued with great energy, he
practised religious austerities, hard to be practised by men of unrestrained
souls. The sage lived upon air only, and renounced sleep for ever. Thus
going about like a blazing fire, one day he happened to see his ancestors,
hanging heads down in a great hole, their feet pointing upwards. On seeing
them, Jaratkaru addressed them, saying:
'Who are you thus hanging heads down in this hole by a rope of virana
fibres that is again secretly eaten into on all sides by a rat living here?'
"The ancestors said, 'We are Rishis of rigid vows, called Yayavaras. We are
sinking low into the earth for want of offspring. We have a son named
Jaratkaru. Woe to us! That wretch hath entered upon a life of austerities
only! The fool doth not think of raising offspring by marriage! It is for that
reason, viz., the fear of extinction of our race, that we are suspended in this
hole. Possessed of means, we fare like unfortunates that have none! O
excellent one, who art thou that thus sorrowest as a friend on our account?
We desire to learn, O Brahmana, who thou art that standest by us, and why,
O best of men, thou sorrowest for us that are so unfortunate.'
"Jaratkaru said, 'Ye are even my sires and grandsires I am that Jaratkaru! O,
tell me, how I may serve you.'
"The fathers then answered, 'Try thy best, O child, to beget a son to extend
our line. Thou wilt then, O excellent one, have done a meritorious art for
both thyself and us. Not by the fruits of virtue, not by ascetic penances well
hoarded up, acquireth the merit which one doth by becoming a father.
Therefore, O child, by our command, set thy heart upon marriage and
offspring. Even this is our highest good.'
"Jaratkaru replied, 'I shall not marry for my sake, nor shall I earn wealth for
enjoyment, but I shall do so for your welfare only. According to this
understanding, I shall, agreeably to the Sastric ordinance, take a wife for
attaining the end. I shall not act otherwise. If a bride may be had of the
same name with me, whose friends would, besides, willingly give her to me
as a gift in charity, I shall wed her duly. But who will give his daughter to a
poor man like me for wife. I shall, however, accept any daughter given to
me as alms. I shall endeavour, ye sires, even thus to wed a girl! Having
given my word, I will not act otherwise. Upon her I will raise offspring for
your redemption, so that, ye fathers, ye may attain to eternal regions (of
bliss) and may rejoice as ye like.'"
So ends the thirteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 14
"Sauti said, 'That Brahmana of rigid vows then wandered over the earth for
a wife but a wife found he not. One day he went into the forest, and
recollecting the words of his ancestors, he thrice prayed in a faint voice for
a bride. Thereupon Vasuki rose and offered his sister for the Rishi's
acceptance. But the Brahmana hesitated to accept her, thinking her not to be
of the same name with himself. The high-souled Jaratkaru thought within
himself, 'I will take none for wife who is not of the same name with myself.'
Then that Rishi of great wisdom and austere penances asked him, saying,
'Tell me truly what is the name of this thy sister, O snake.'
"Vasuki replied, 'O Jaratkaru, this my younger sister is called Jaratkaru.
Given away by me, accept this slender-waisted damsel for thy spouse. O
best of Brahmanas, for thee I reserved her. Therefore, take her.' Saying this,
he offered his beautiful sister to Jaratkaru who then espoused her with
ordained rites.'"
So ends the thirteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 15
"Sauti said, 'O foremost of persons acquainted with Brahma, the mother of
the snakes had cursed them of old, saying, 'He that hath the Wind for his
charioteer (viz., Agni) shall burn you all in Janamejaya's sacrifice!' It was to
neutralise that curse that the chief of the snakes married his sister to that
high-souled Rishi of excellent vows. The Rishi wedded her according to the
rites ordained (in the scriptures), and from them was born a high-souled son
called Astika. An illustrious ascetic; versed in the Vedas and their branches,
he regarded all with an even eye, and removed the fears of both his parents.
"Then, after a long space of time, a king descending from the Pandava line
celebrated a great sacrifice known as the Snake-sacrifice, After that
sacrifice had commenced for the destruction of the snakes, Astika delivered
the Nagas, viz., his brothers and maternal uncles and other snakes (from a
fiery death). And he delivered his fathers also by begetting offspring. And
by his austerities, O Brahmana, and various vows and study of the Vedas,
he freed himself from all his debts. By sacrifices, at which various kinds of
offerings were made, he propitiated the gods. By practising the
Brahmacharya mode of life he conciliated the Rishis; and by begetting
offspring he gratified his ancestors.
"Thus Jaratkaru of rigid vows discharged the heavy debt he owed to his
sires who being thus relieved from bondage ascended to heaven. Thus
having acquired great religious merit, Jaratkaru, after a long course of
years, went to heaven, leaving Astika behind. There is the story of Astika
that I have related duly Now, tell me, O tiger of Bhrigu's race, what else I
shall narrate."
So ends the fifteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 16
"Saunaka said, 'O Sauti, relate once more in detail this history of the learned
and virtuous Astika. Our curiosity for hearing it is great. O amiable one,
thou speakest sweetly, with proper accent and emphasis; and we are well￾pleased with thy speech. Thou speakest even as thy father. Thy sire was
ever ready to please us. Tell us now the story as thy father had related it.'
"Sauti said, 'O thou that art blest with longevity, I shall narrate the history of
Astika as I heard it from my father. O Brahmana, in the golden age,
Prajapati had two daughters. O sinless one, the sisters were endowed with
wonderful beauty. Named Kadru and Vinata, they became the wives of
Kasyapa. Kasyapa derived great pleasure from his two wedded wives and
being gratified he, resembling Prajapati himself, offered to give each of
them a boon. Hearing that their lord was willing to confer on them their
choice blessings, those excellent ladies felt transports of joy. Kadru wished
to have for sons a thousand snakes all of equal splendour. And Vinata
wished to bring forth two sons surpassing the thousand offsprings of Kadru
in strength, energy, size of body, and prowess. Unto Kadru her lord gave
that boon about a multitude of offspring. And unto Vinata also, Kasyapa
said, 'Be it so!' Then Vinata, having; obtained her prayer, rejoiced greatly.
Obtaining two sons of superior prowess, she regarded her boon fulfilled.
Kadru also obtained her thousand sons of equal splendour. 'Bear the
embryos carefully,' said Kasyapa, and then he went into the forest, leaving
his two wives pleased with his blessings.'
"Sauti continued, 'O best of regenerate ones, after a long time, Kadru
brought forth a thousand eggs, and Vinata two. Their maid-servants
deposited the eggs separately in warm vessels. Five hundred years passed
away, and the thousand eggs produced by Kadru burst and out came the
progeny. But the twins of Vinata did not appear. Vinata was jealous, and
therefore she broke one of the eggs and found in it an embryo with the
upper part developed but the lower one undeveloped. At this, the child in
the egg became angry and cursed his mother, saying. 'Since thou hast
prematurely broken this egg, thou shall serve as a slave. Shouldst thou wait
five hundred years and not destroy, or render the other egg half-developed,
by breaking it through impatience, then the illustrious child within it will
deliver thee from slavery! And if thou wouldst have the child strong, thou
must take tender care of the egg for all this time!' Thus cursing his mother,
the child rose to the sky. O Brahmana, even he is the charioteer of Surya,
always seen in the hour of morning!
"Then at the expiration of the five hundred years, bursting open the other
egg, out came Garuda, the serpent-eater. O tiger of Bhrigu's race,
immediately on seeing the light, that son of Vinata left his mother. And the
lord of birds, feeling hungry, took wing in quest of the food assigned to him
by the Great Ordainer of all.".
So ends the sixteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 17
"Sauti said, 'O ascetic, about this time the two sisters saw approaching near,
that steed of complacent appearance named Uchchaihsravas who was
worshipped by the gods, that gem of steeds, who arose at the churning of
the Ocean for nectar. Divine, graceful, perpetually young, creation's master￾piece, and of irresistible vigour, it was blest with every auspicious mark.'
"Saunaka asked, 'Why did the gods churn the Ocean for nectar, and under
what circumstances and when as you say, did that best of steeds so powerful
and resplendent spring?'
"Sauti said, 'There is a mountain named Meru, of blazing appearance, and
looking like a heap of effulgence. The rays of the Sun falling on its peaks of
golden lustre are dispersed by them. Decked with gold and exceedingly
beautiful, that mountain is the haunt of the gods and the Gandharvas. It is
immeasurable and unapproachable by men of manifold sins. Dreadful
beasts of prey wander over its breasts, and it is illuminated by many divine
life-giving herbs. It stands kissing the heavens by its height and is the first
of mountains. Ordinary people cannot even think of ascending it. It is
graced with trees and streams, and resounds with the charming melody of
winged choirs. Once the celestials sat on its begemmed peak--in conclave.
They who had practised penances and observed excellent vows for amrita
now seemed to be eager seekers alter amrita (celestial ambrosia). Seeing the
celestial assembly in anxious mood Nara-yana said to Brahman, 'Do thou
churn the Ocean with the gods and the Asuras. By doing so, amrita will be
obtained as also all drugs and gems. O ye gods, chum the Ocean, ye will
discover amrita.'"
So ends the seventeenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 18
"Sauti said, 'There is a mountain called Mandara adorned with cloud-like
peaks. It is the best of mountains, and is covered all over with intertwining
herbs. There countless birds pour forth their melodies, and beasts of prey
roam about. The gods, the Apsaras and the Kinnaras visit the place.
Upwards it rises eleven thousand yojanas, and descends downwards as
much. The gods wanted to tear it up and use it as a churning rod but failing
to do so same to Vishnu and Brahman who were sitting together, and said
unto them, 'Devise some efficient scheme, consider, ye gods, how Mandara
may be dislodged for our good.'
"Sauti continued, 'O son of Bhrigu! Vishnu with Brahman assented to it.
And the lotus-eyed one (Vishnu) laid the hard task on the mighty Ananta,
the prince of snakes. The powerful Ananta, directed thereto both by
Brahman and Narayana, O Brahmana, tore up the mountain with the woods
thereon and with the denizens of those woods. And the gods came to the
shore of the Ocean with Ananta and addressed the Ocean, saying, 'O Ocean;
we have come to churn thy waters for obtaining nectar.' And the Ocean
replied, 'Be it so, as I shall not go without a share of it. I am able to bear the
prodigious agitation of my waters set up by the mountain.' The gods then
went to the king of tortoises and said to him, 'O Tortoise-king, thou wilt
have to hold the mountain on thy back!' The Tortoise-king agreed, and Indra
contrived to place the mountain on the former's back.
"And the gods and the Asuras made of Mandara a churning staff and Vasuki
the cord, and set about churning the deep for amrita. The Asuras held
Vasuki by the hood and the gods held him by the tail. And Ananta, who was
on the side of the gods, at intervals raised the snake's hood and suddenly
lowered it. And in consequence of the stretch Vasuki received at the hands
of the gods and the Asuras, black vapours with flames issued from his
mouth. These, turned into clouds charged with lightning, poured showers
that refreshed the tired gods. And flowers that also fell on all sides of the
celestials from the trees on the whirling Mandara, refreshed them.
"Then, O Brahmana, out of the deep came a tremendous roar like unto the
roar of the clouds at the Universal Dissolution. Diverse aquatic animals
being crushed by the great mountain gave up the ghost in the salt waters.
And many denizens of the lower regions and the world of Varuna were
killed. Large trees with birds on the whirling Mandara were torn up by the
roots and fell into the water. The mutual friction of those trees also
produced fires that blazed up frequently. The mountain thus looked like a
mass of dark clouds charged with lightning. O Brahmana, the fire spread,
and consumed the lions, elephants and other creatures that were on the
mountain. Then Indra extinguished that fire by pouring down heavy
showers.
"After the churning, O Brahmana, had gone on for some time, gummy
exudations of various trees and herbs vested with the properties of amrita
mingled with the waters of the Ocean. And the celestials attained to
immortality by drinking of the water mixed with those gums and with the
liquid extract of gold. By degrees, the milky water of the agitated deep
turned into clarified butter by virtue of those gums and juices. But nectar
did not appear even then. The gods came before the boon-granting Brahman
seated on his seat and said, 'Sire, we are spent up, we have no strength left
to churn further. Nectar hath not yet arisen so that now we have no resource
save Narayana.'
"On hearing them, Brahman said to Narayana, 'O Lord, condescend to grant
the gods strength to churn the deep afresh.'
"Then Narayana agreeing to grant their various prayers, said, 'Ye wise ones,
I grant you sufficient strength. Go, put the mountain in position again and
churn the water.'
'Re-established thus in strength, the gods recommenced churning. After a
while, the mild Moon of a thousand rays emerged from the Ocean.
Thereafter sprung forth Lakshmi dressed in white, then Soma, then the
White Steed, and then the celestial gem Kaustubha which graces the breast
of Narayana. Then Lakshmi, Soma and the Steed, fleet as the mind, all
came before the gods on high. Then arose the divine Dhanwantari himself
with the white vessel of nectar in his hand. And seeing him, the Asuras set
up a loud cry, saying, 'It be ours.'
"And at length rose the great elephant, Airavata, of huge body and with two
pair of white tusks. And him took Indra the wielder of the thunderbolt. But
with the churning still going on, the poison Kalakuta appeared at last.
Engulfing the Earth it suddenly blazed up like a fire attended with fumes.
And by the scent of the fearful Kalakuta, the three worlds were stupefied.
And then Siva, being solicited by Brahman, swallowed that poison for the
safety of the creation. The divine Maheswara held it in his throat, and it is
said that from that time he is called Nilakantha (blue-throated). Seeing all
these wondrous things, the Asuras were filled with despair, and got
themselves prepared for entering into hostilities with the gods for the
possession of Lakshmi and Amrita. Thereupon Narayana called his
bewitching Maya (illusive power) to his aid, and assuming the form of an
enticing female, coquetted with the Danavas. The Danavas and the Daityas
charmed with her exquisite beauty and grace lost their reason and
unanimously placed the Amrita in the hands of that fair damsel.'"
So ends the eighteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 19
"Sauti said, 'Then the Daityas and the Danauas equipped with first-class
armours and various weapons attacked the gods. In the meantime the
valiant Lord Vishnu in the form of an enchantress accompanied by Nara
deceived the mighty Danavas and took away the Amrita from their hands.
"And all the gods at that time of great fright drank the Amrita with delight,
receiving it from Vishnu. And while the gods were partaking of it, after
which they had so much hankered, a Danava named Rahu was also drinking
it among them in the guise of a god. And when the Amrita had reached
Rahu's throat only, Surya and Soma (recognised him and) intimated the fact
to the gods. And Narayana instantly cut off with his discus the well-adorned
head of the Danava who was drinking the Amrita without permission. And
the huge head of the Danava, cut off by the discus and resembling a
mountain peak, then rose up to the sky and began to utter dreadful cries.
And the Danava's headless trunk, falling upon the ground and rolling
thereon, made the Earth tremble with her mountains, forests and islands.
And from that time there is a long-standing quarrel between Rahu's head
and Surya and Soma. And to this day it swalloweth Surya and Soma (during
solar and lunar eclipses).
"Then Narayana quitting his enchanting female form and hurling many
terrible weapons at the Danavas, made them tremble. And thus on the
shores of the salt-water sea, commenced the dreadful battle of the gods and
the Asuras. And sharp-pointed javelins and lances and various weapons by
thousands began to be discharged on all sides. And mangled with the discus
and wounded with swords, darts and maces, the Asuras in large numbers
vomited blood and lay prostrate on the earth. Cut off from the trunks with
sharp double-edged swords, heads adorned with bright gold, fell continually
on the field of battle. Their bodies drenched in gore, the great Asuras lay
dead everywhere. It seemed as if red-dyed mountain peaks lay scattered all
around. And when the Sun rose in his splendour, thousands of warriors
struck one another with weapons. And cries of distress were heard
everywhere. The warriors fighting at a distance from one another brought
one another down by sharp iron missiles, and those fighting at close
quarters slew one another with blows of their fists. And the air was filled
with shrieks of distress. Everywhere were heard the alarming sounds,--'cut',
'pierce', 'at them', 'hurl down', 'advance'.
'And when the battle was raging fiercely, Nara and Narayana entered the
field. And Narayana seeing the celestial bow in the hand of Nara, called to
mind his own weapon, the Danava-destroying discus. And lo! the discus,
Sudarsana, destroyer of enemies, like to Agni in effulgence and dreadful in
battle, came from the sky as soon as thought of. And when it came,
Narayana of fierce energy, possessing arms like the trunk of an elephant,
hurled with great force that weapon of extraordinary lustre, effulgent as
blazing fire, dreadful and capable of destroying hostile towns. And that
discus blazing like the fire that consumeth all things at the end of Yuga,
hurled with force from the hands of Narayana, and falling constantly
everywhere, destroyed the Daityas and the Danavas by thousands.
Sometimes it blazed like fire and consumed them all; sometimes it struck
them down as it coursed through the sky; and sometimes, falling on the
earth, it drank their life-blood like a goblin.
"On the other hand, the Danavas, white as the clouds from which the rain
hath dropped, possessing great strength and bold hearts, ascended the sky,
and by hurling down thousands of mountains, continually harassed the
gods. And those dreadful mountains, like masses of clouds, with their trees
and flat tops, falling from the sky, collided with one another and produced a
tremendous roar. And when thousands of warriors shouted without
intermission in the field of battle and mountains with the woods thereon
began to fall around, the earth with her forests trembled. Then the divine
Nara appeared at the scene of the dreadful conflict between the Asuras and
the Ganas (the followers of Rudra), and reducing to dust those rocks by
means of his gold-headed arrows, he covered the heavens with dust. Thus
discomfited by the gods, and seeing the furious discus scouring the fields of
heaven like a blazing flame, the mighty Danavas entered the bowels of the
earth, while others plunged into the sea of salt-waters.
"And having gained the victory, the gods offered due respect to Mandara
and placed him again on his own base. And the nectar-bearing gods made
the heavens resound with their shouts, and went to their own abodes. And
the gods, on returning to the heavens, rejoiced greatly, and Indra and the
other deities made over to Narayana the vessel of Amrita for careful
keeping.'"
And so ends the nineteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 20
"Sauti said, 'Thus have I recited to you the whole story of how Amrita was
churned out of the Ocean, and the occasion on which the horse
Uchchaihsravas of great beauty and incomparable prowess was obtained. It
was this horse about which Kadru asked Vinata, saying, 'Tell me, amiable
sister, without taking much time, of what colour Uchchaishravas is.' And
Vinata answered, 'That prince of steeds is certainly white. What dost thou
think, sister? Say thou what is its colour. Let us lay a wager upon it.' Kadru
replied, then, 'O thou of sweet smiles. I think that horse is black in its tail.
Beauteous one, bet with me that she who loseth will become the other's
slave.'
'Sauti continued, 'Thus wagering with each other about menial service as a
slave, the sisters went home, and resolved to satisfy themselves by
examining the horse next day. And Kadru, bent upon practising a deception,
ordered her thousand sons to transform themselves into black hair and
speedily cover the horse's tail in order that she might not become a slave.
But her sons, the snakes, refusing to do her bidding, she cursed them,
saying, 'During the snake-sacrifice of the wise king Janamejaya of the
Pandava race, Agni shall consume you all.' And the Grandsire (Brahman)
himself heard this exceedingly cruel curse pronounced by Kadru, impelled
by the fates. And seeing that the snakes had multiplied exceedingly, the
Grandsire, moved by kind consideration for his creatures, sanctioned with
all the gods this curse of Kadru. Indeed, as the snakes were of virulent
poison, great prowess and excess of strength, and ever bent on biting other
creatures, their mother's conduct towards them--those persecutors of all
creatures,--was very proper for the good of all creatures. Fate always
inflicts punishment of death on those who seek the death of other creatures.
The gods, having exchanged such sentiments with one another, supported
Kadru's action (and went away). And Brahman, calling Kasyapa to him,
spake unto him these words, 'O thou pure one who overcomest all enemies,
these snakes begotten by you, who are of virulent poison and huge bodies,
and ever intent on biting other creatures, have been cursed by their mother.
O son, do not grieve for it in the least. The destruction of the snakes in the
sacrifice hath, indeed, been ordained long ago' Saying this, the divine
Creator of the Universe comforted Kasyapa and imparted to that illustrious
one the knowledge of neutralising poison."
And so ends the twentieth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 21
"Sauti said. 'Then when the night had passed away and the sun had risen in
the morning, O thou whose wealth is asceticism, the two sisters Kadru and
Vinata, having laid a wager about slavery, went with haste and impatience
to view the steed Uchchaishravas from a near point. On their way they saw
the Ocean, that receptacle of waters, vast and deep, rolling and
tremendously roaring, full of fishes large enough to swallow the whale, and
abounding with huge makaras and creatures of various forms by thousands,
and rendered inaccessible by the presence of other terrible, monster-shaped,
dark, and fierce aquatic animals, abounding with tortoises and crocodiles,
the mine of all kinds of gems, the home of Varuna (the water-God), the
excellent and beautiful residence of the Nagas, the lord of all rivers, the
abode of the subterranean fire, the friend (or asylum) of the Asuras, the
terror of all creatures, the grand reservoir of water, and ever immutable. It is
holy, beneficial to the gods, and is the great source of nectar; without limits,
inconceivable, sacred, and highly wonderful. It is dark, terrible with the
sound of aquatic creatures, tremendously roaring, and full of deep whirl￾pools. It is an object of terror to all creatures. Moved by the winds blowing
from its shores and heaving high, agitated and disturbed, it seems to dance
everywhere with uplifted hands represented by its surges. Full of swelling
billows caused by the waxing and waning of the moon the parent of
Vasudeva's great conch called Panchajanya, the great mine of gems, its
waters were formerly disturbed in consequence of the agitation caused
within them by the Lord Govinda of immeasurable prowess when he had
assumed the form of a wild boar for raising the (submerged) Earth. Its
bottom, lower than the nether regions, the vow observing regenerate Rishi
Atri could not fathom after (toiling for) a hundred years. It becomes the bed
of the lotus-naveled Vishnu when at the termination of every Yuga that
deity of immeasurable power enjoys yoga-nidra, the deep sleep under the
spell of spiritual meditation. It is the refuge of Mainaka fearful of falling
thunder, and the retreat of the Asuras overcome in fierce encounters. It
offers water as sacrificial butter to the blazing fire issuing from the mouth
of Varava (the Ocean-mare). It is fathomless and without limits, vast and
immeasurable, and the lord of rivers.
"And they saw that unto it rushed mighty rivers by thousands with proud
gait, like amorous competitors, each eager for meeting it, forestalling the
others. And they saw that it was always full, and always dancing in its
waves. And they saw that it was deep and abounding with fierce whales and
makaras. And it resounded constantly with the terrible sounds of aquatic
creatures. And they saw that it was vast, and wide as the expanse of space,
unfathomable, and limitless, and the grand reservoir of water.'"
And so ends the twenty-first section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 22
"Sauti said, 'The Nagas after consultation arrived at the conclusion that they
should do their mother's bidding, for if she failed in obtaining her desire she
might withdraw her affection and burn them all. If, on the other hand, she
were graciously inclined, she might free them from her curse. They said,
'We will certainly render the horse's tail black.' And it is said that they then
went and became hairs in the horse's tail.
"Now the two co-wives had laid the wager. And having laid the wager, O
best of Brahmanas, the two sisters Kadru and Vinata, the daughters of
Daksha, proceeded in great delight along the sky to see the other side of the
Ocean. And on their way they saw the Ocean, that receptacle of waters,
incapable of being easily disturbed, mightily agitated all of a sudden by the
wind, and roaring tremendously; abounding with fishes capable of
swallowing the whale and full of makaras; containing also creatures of
diverse forms counted by thousands; frightful from the presence of horrible
monsters, inaccessible, deep, and terrible, the mine of all kinds of gems, the
home of Varuna (the water-god), the wonderful habitations of the Nagas,
the lord of rivers, the abode of the subterranean fire; the residence of the
Asuras and of many dreadful creatures; the reservoir of water, not subject to
decay, aromatic, and wonderful, the great source of the amrita of the
celestials; immeasurable and inconceivable, containing waters that are holy,
filled to the brim by many thousands of great rivers, dancing as it were in
waves. Such was the Ocean, full of rolling waves, vast as the expanse of the
sky, deep, of body lighted with the flames of subterranean fire, and roaring,
which the sisters quickly passed over.'"
And so ends the twenty-second section in the Astika Parva of the Adi
Parva.
Section 23
"Sauti said, 'Having crossed the Ocean, Kadru of swift speed, accompanied
by Vinata, soon alighted near the horse. They then both beheld that
foremost of steeds of great speed, with body white as the rays of the moon
but having black hairs (in the tail). And observing many black hairs in the
tail, Kadru put Vinata, who was deeply dejected, into slavery. And thus
Vinata having lost the wager, entered into a state of slavery and became
exceedingly sorry.
"In the meantime, when his time came, burst forth from the egg without
(the help of his) mother, Garuda of great splendour, enkindling all the points
of the universe, that mighty being endued with strength, that bird capable of
assuming at will any form, of going at will everywhere, and of calling to his
aid at will any measure of energy. Effulgent like a heap of fire, he shone
terribly. Of lustre equal to that of the fire at the end of the Yuga, his eyes
were bright like the lightning-flash. And soon after birth, that bird grew in
size and increasing his body ascended the skies. Fierce and vehemently
roaring, he looked as terrible as second Ocean-fire. And all the deities
seeing him, sought the protection of Vibhavasu (Agni). And they bowed
down to that deity of manifold forms seated on his seat and spake unto him
these words, 'O Agni, extend not thy body! Wilt thou consume us? Lo, this
huge heap of thy flames is spreading wide!' And Agni replied, 'O, ye
persecutors of the Asuras, it is not as ye imagine. This is Garuda of great
strength and equal to me in splendour, endued with great energy, and born
to promote the joy of Vinata. Even the sight of this heap of effulgence hath
caused this delusion in you. He is the mighty son of Kasyapa, the destroyer
of the Nagas, engaged in the well-being of the gods, and the foe of the
Daityas and the Rakshasas. Be not afraid of it in the least. Come with me
and see.' Thus addressed, the gods from a distance.
"The gods said, 'Thou art a Rishi (i.e., one cognisant of all mantras), share
of the largest portion in sacrifices, ever resplendent, the controller along
with the Rishi wended their way towards Garuda and adored him of birds,
the presiding spirit of the animate and the inanimate universe. Thou art the
destroyer of all, the creator of all; thou art the very Hiranyagarbha; thou art
the progenitor of creation in the form of Daksha and the other Prajapatis;
thou art Indra (the king of the gods), thou art Hayagriva the steed necked
incarnation of Vishnu; thou art the arrow (Vishnu himself, as he became
such in the hands of Mahadeva at the burning of Tripura); thou art the lord
of the universe; thou art the mouth of Vishnu; thou art the four-faced
Padmaja; thou art the Brahmana (i.e., wise), thou art Agni, Pavana, etc.
(i.e., the presiding deity of every object in the universe). Thou art
knowledge, thou art the illusion to which we are all subject; thou art the all￾pervading spirit; thou art the lord of the gods; thou art the great Truth; thou
art fearless; thou art ever unchanged; thou art Brahma without attributes;
thou art the energy of the Sun; thou art the intellectual functions; thou art
our great protector; thou art the ocean of holiness; thou art purity; thou art
bereft of the attributes of darkness; thou art the possessor of the six high
attributes; thou art he who cannot be withstood in contest. From thee have
emanated all things; thou art of excellent deeds; thou art all that hath not
been and all that hath been. Thou art pure knowledge; thou displayest to us,
as Surya does by his rays, this animate and inanimate universe; thou
darkenest the splendour of Surya at every moment, and thou art the
destroyer of all; thou art all that is perishable and all that is imperishable. O
thou resplendent as Agni, thou burnest all even as Surya in his anger
burneth all creatures. O terrible one, thou resistest even as the fire that
destroys everything at the time of the Universal Dissolution. O mighty
Garuda who movest in the skies, we seek thy protection. O lord of birds thy
energy is extraordinary, thy splendour is that of fire, thy brightness is like
that of the lightning that no darkness can approach. Thou reachest the very
clouds, and art both the cause and the effect; the dispenser of boons and
invincible in prowess. O Lord, this whole universe is rendered hot by thy
splendour, bright as the lustre of heated gold. Protect these high-souled
gods, who overcome by thee and terrified withal, are flying along the
heavens in different directions on their celestial cars. O thou best of birds,
thou Lord of all, thou art the son of the merciful and high-souled Rishi
Kasyapa; therefore, be not wroth but have mercy on the universe. Thou art
Supreme. O pacify thy anger and preserve us. At thy voice, loud as the roar
of the thunder, the ten points, the skies, the heavens, the Earth and our
hearts, O bird, thou art continuously shaking. O, diminish this thy body
resembling Agni. At the sight of the splendour resembling that of Yama
when in wrath, our hearts lose all equanimity and quake. O thou lord of
birds, be propitious to us who solicit thy mercy! O illustrious one, bestow
on us good fortune and joy.'
And that bird of fair feathers, thus adored by the deities and diverse sections
of Rishis, reduced his own energy and splendour.'"
And thus ends the twenty-third section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 24
"Sauti said, 'Then hearing of and beholding his own body, that bird of
beautiful feathers diminished its size.'
"And Garuda said, 'Let no creature be afraid; as ye are in a fright at the
sight of my terrible form, I shall diminish my energy.'
"Sauti continued, 'Then that bird capable of going everywhere at will, that
ranger of the skies capable of calling to his aid any measure of energy,
bearing Aruna on his back, wended from his father's home and arrived at
his mother's side on the other shore of the great ocean. And he placed Aruna
of great splendour in the eastern regions, just at a time when Surya had
resolved to burn the worlds with his fierce rays.'
"Saunaka said, 'When did the revered Surya resolve at the time to burn the
worlds? What wrong was done to him by the gods that provoked his ire?'
"Sauti said, 'O sinless one, when Rahu was drinking nectar among the gods
at the time of the churning of the ocean he was pointed out to the gods by
Surya and Soma, and from that time he conceived an enmity towards those
deities. And upon this Rahu sought to devour his afflictor (Surya), became
wroth, and thought, 'Oh, this enmity of Rahu towards me hath sprung from
my desire of benefiting the gods. And this dire consequence I alone have to
sustain. Indeed, at this pass help I obtain not. And before the very eyes of
the denizens of heaven I am going to be devoured and they brook it quietly.
Therefore, for the destruction of the worlds must I strive.' And with this
resolution he went to the mountains of the west.
"And from that place he began to radiate his heat around for the destruction
of the world. And then the great Rishis, approaching the gods, spake unto
them, 'Lo, in the middle of the night springeth a great heat striking terror
into every heart, and destructive of the three worlds.' Then the gods,
accompanied by the Rishis, wended to the Grandsire, and said unto him, 'O
what is this great heat today that causeth such panic? Surya hath not yet
risen, still the destruction (of the world) is obvious. O Lord, what will
happen when he doth rise?" The Grandsire replied, 'Indeed, Surya is
prepared to rise today for the destruction of the world. As soon as he will
appear he will burn everything into a heap of ashes. By me, however, hath
the remedy been provided beforehand. The intelligent son of Kasyapa is
known to all by the name of Aruna. He is huge of body and of great
splendour; he shall stay in front of Surya, doing the duty of his charioteer
and taking away all the energy of the former. And this will ensure the
welfare of the worlds, of the Rishis, and of the dwellers in heaven.'
"Sauti continued, 'Aruna, at the behest of the Grandsire, did all that he was
ordered to do. And Surya rose veiled by Aruna's person. I have told thee
now why Surya was in wrath, and how Aruna, the brother of Garuda, was
appointed as his charioteer. Hear next of that other question asked by thee a
little while ago.'"
And so ends the twenty-fourth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 25
"Sauti said, 'Then that bird of great strength and energy and capable of
going at will to every place repaired to his mother's side on the other shore
of the great ocean. Thither lived Vinata in affliction, defeated in wager and
put into a state of slavery. Once Kadru calling Vinata who had prostrated
herself before the former, addressed her these words in the presence of her
son, 'O gentle Vinata, there is in the midst of the ocean, in a remote quarter,
a delightful and fair region inhabited by the Nagas. Bear me thither!' At this
that mother of the bird of fair feathers bore (on her shoulders) the mother of
the snakes. And Garuda also, directed by his mother's words, carried (on his
back) the snakes. And that ranger of the skies born of Vinata began to
ascend towards the Sun. And thereupon the snakes, scorched by the rays of
the Sun, swooned away. And Kadru seeing her sons in that state prayed to
Indra, saying, 'I bow to thee, thou Lord of all the gods! I bow to thee, thou
slayer of Vritra! I bow to thee, thou slayer of Namuchi! O thou of a
thousand eyes, consort of Sachi! By thy showers, be thou the protector of
the snakes scorched by the Sun. O thou best of the deities, thou art our great
protector. O Purandara, thou art able to grant rain in torrents. Thou art Vayu
(the air), the clouds, fire, and the lightning of the skies. Thou art the
propeller of the clouds, and hast been called the great cloud (i.e., that which
will darken the universe at the end of Yuga). Thou art the fierce and
incomparable thunder, and the roaring clouds. Thou art the Creator of the
worlds and their Destroyer. Thou art unconquered. Thou art the light of all
creatures, Aditya, Vibhavasu, and the wonderful elements. Thou art the
ruler of all the gods. Thou art Vishnu. Thou hast a thousand eyes. Thou art a
god, and the final resource. Thou art, O deity, all amrita, and the most
adored Soma. Thou art the moment, the lunar day, the bala (minute), thou
art the kshana (4 minutes). Thou art the lighted fortnight, and also the dark
fortnight. Thou art kala, thou kashtha, and thou Truti. Thou art the year, the
seasons, the months, the nights, and the days. Thou art the fair Earth with
her mountains and forests. Thou art also the firmament, resplendent with
the Sun. Thou art the great Ocean with heaving billows and abounding with
whales, swallowers of whales, and makaras, and various fishes. Thou art of
great renown, always adored by the wise and by the great Rishis with minds
rapt in contemplation. Thou drinkest, for the good of all creatures, the Soma
juice in sacrifices and the clarified butter offered with sacred invocation.
Thou art always worshipped at sacrifices by Brahmanas moved by desire of
fruit. O thou of incomparable mass of strength, thou art sung in the Vedas
and Vedangas. It is for that reason that learned Brahmanas bent upon
performing sacrifices, study the Vedas with every care.'"
And so ends the twenty-fifth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Footnotes
68:1 These are divisions of time.
Section 26
"Sauti said, 'And then Indra, the king of gods, having the best of horses for
his bearer, thus adored by Kadru, covered the entire firmament with masses
of blue clouds. And he commanded the clouds, saying, Pour ye, your
vivifying and blessed drops!' And those clouds, luminous with lightning,
and incessantly roaring against each other in the welkin, poured abundant
water. And the sky, in consequence of those wonderful and terribly-roaring
clouds that were incessantly begetting vast quantities of water, looked as if
the end of Yuga had come. And in consequence of the myriads of waves
caused in the falling torrents, the deep roar of the clouds, the flashes of
lightning, the violence of the wind, and the general agitation, the sky looked
as if dancing in madness. The sky became overcast, and the rays of the Sun
and the Moon totally disappeared in consequence of that incessant
downpour.
"And upon Indra's causing that downpour, the Nagas became exceedingly
delighted. And the Earth was filled with water all around. And the cool,
clear water reached even the nether regions. And there were countless
waves of water all over the Earth. And the snakes with their mother reached
(in safety) the island called Ramaniyaka."
And so ends the twenty-sixth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 27
"Sauti said, 'And then the Nagas drenched by that shower, became
exceedingly glad. And borne by that bird of fair feathers, they soon arrived
at the island. That island had been fixed by the Creator of the Universe as
the abode of the makaras. There they saw the terrible Lavana Samudra
(ocean of salt). On arriving there with Garuda, they saw there a beautiful
forest washed by the waters of the sea and resounding with the music of
winged choirs. And there were clusters of trees all around laden with
various fruits and flowers. And there were also fair mansions all around;
and many tanks full of lotuses. And it was also adorned with many lakes of
pure water. And it was refreshed with pure incense-breathing breezes. And
it was adorned with many a tree that grew only on the hills of Malaya, and
seemed by their tallness to reach the very heavens. And there were also
various other trees whose flowers were scattered all around by the breeze.
And that forest was charming and dear to the Gandharvas and always gave
them pleasure. And it was full of bees maddened with the honey they
sucked. And the sight of all this was exceedingly delightful. And in
consequence of many things there, capable of charming everybody, that
forest was fair, delightful, and holy. And, echoing with the notes of various
birds, it delighted greatly the sons of Kadru.
"And the snakes, after arriving at that forest, began to enjoy themselves.
And they commanded the lord of birds, viz., Garuda, of great energy,
saying, 'Convey us to some other fair island with pure water. Thou ranger of
the skies, thou must have seen many fair regions while coursing (through
the air).' Garuda, alter reflecting for a few moments, asked his mother
Vinata, saying, 'Why, mother, have I to do the bidding of the snakes?'
Vinata thus questioned by him spake unto that ranger of the skies, her son,
invested with every virtue, of great energy, and great strength, as follows:
"Vinata said, 'O thou best of birds, I have become, from misfortune, the
slave of my co-wife. The snakes, by an act of deception, caused me to lose
my bet and have made me so.' When his mother had told him the reason,
that ranger of the skies, dejected with grief, addressed the snakes, saying,
'Tell me, ye snakes, by bringing what thing, gaining a knowledge of what
thing, or doing what act of prowess, we may be freed from this state of
bondage to you.'" Sauti continued, 'The snakes, hearing him, said, 'Bring
thou amrita by force. Then O bird, shall you be freed from bondage.'" And
so ends the twenty-seventh section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
Section 28
"Sauti said, 'Garuda, thus addressed by the snakes, then said unto his
mother, 'I shall go to bring amrita, I desire to eat something in the way.
Direct me to it.' Vinata replied, 'In a remote region in the midst of the ocean,
the Nishadas have their fair home. Having eaten the thousands of Nishadas
that live there, bring thou amrita. But let not thy heart be ever set on taking
the life of a Brahmana. Of all creatures a Brahmana must not be slain. He
is, indeed, like fire. A Brahmana, when angry, becomes like fire or the Sun,
like poison or an edged weapon. A Brahmana, it has been said, is the master
of all creatures. For these and other reasons, a Brahmana is the adored of
the virtuous. O child, he is never to be slain by thee even in anger. Hostility
with Brahmanas, therefore, would not be proper under any circumstances.
O sinless one, neither Agni nor Surya truly can consume so much as does a
Brahmana of rigid vows, when angry. By these various indications must
thou know a good Brahmana. Indeed, a brahmana is the first-born of all
creatures, the foremost of the four orders, the father and the master of all.'"
Garuda then asked, 'O mother, of what form is a Brahmana, of what
behaviour, and of what prowess? Doth he shine like fire, or is he of tranquil
mien? And, O mother, it behoveth thee to tell my inquiring self, those
auspicious signs by which I may recognise a Brahmana.'" Vinata replied,
saying, 'O child, him shouldst thou know as the best amongst Brahmanas
who having entered thy throat would torture thee as a fish-hook or burn thee
as blazing charcoal. A Brahmana must never be slain by thee even in anger.'
And Vinata out of affection for her son, again told him these words, 'Him
shouldst thou know as a good Brahmana who would not be digested in thy
stomach.' Although she knew the incomparable strength of her son, yet she
blessed him heartily, for, deceived by the snakes, she was very much
afflicted by woe. And she said. 'Let Marut (the god of the winds) protect thy
wings, and Surya and Soma thy vertebral regions; let Agni protect thy head,
and the Vasus thy whole body. I also, O child (engaged in beneficial
ceremonies), shall sit here for your welfare. Go then, O child, in safety to
accomplish thy purpose.'
"Sauti continued, 'Then Garuda, having heard the words of his mother,
stretched his wings and ascended the skies. And endued with great strength,
he soon fell upon the Nishadas, hungry and like another Yama. And bent
upon slaying the Nishadas, he raised a great quantity of dust that overspread
the firmament, and sucking up water from amid the ocean, shook the trees
growing on the adjacent mountains. And then that lord of birds obstructed
the principal thoroughfares of the town of the Nishadas by his mouth,
increasing its orifice at will. And the Nishadas began to fly in great haste in
the direction of the open mouth of the great serpent-eater. And as birds in
great affliction ascend by thousand into the skies when the trees in a forest
are shaken by the winds, so those Nishadas blinded by the dust raised by the
storm entered the wide-extending cleft of Garuda's mouth open to receive
them. And then the hungry lord of all rangers of the skies, that oppressor of
enemies, endued with great strength, and moving with greatest celerity to
achieve his end, closed his mouth, killing innumerable Nishadas following
the occupation of fishermen.'"
So ends the twenty-eighth section in the Astika Parva of Adi Parva.
Section 29
"Sauti continued, 'A certain Brahmana with his wife had entered the throat
of that ranger of the skies. The former began to burn the bird's throat like a
piece of flaming charcoal. Him Garuda addressed, saying, 'O best of
Brahmanas, come out soon from my mouth which I open for thee. A
Brahmana must never be slain by me, although he may be always engaged
in sinful practices.' Unto Garuda who had thus addressed him that
Brahmana said, 'O, let this woman of the Nishada caste, who is my wife,
also come out with me.' And Garuda said, 'Taking the woman also of the
Nishada caste with thee, come out soon. Save thyself without delay since
thou hast not yet been digested by the heat of my stomach.'
"Sauti continued, 'And then that Brahmana, accompanied by his wife of the
Nishada caste, came out, and praising Garuda wended whatever way he
liked. And when that Brahmana had come out with his wife, that lord of
birds, fleet as the mind, stretching his wings ascended the skies. He then
saw his father, and, hailed by him, Garuda, of incomparable prowess made
proper answers. And the great Rishi (Kasyapa) then asked him, 'O child, is
it well with thee? Dost thou get sufficient food every day? Is there food in
plenty for thee in the world of men?'
"Garuda replied, 'My mother is ever well. And so is my brother, and so am
I. But, father, I do not always obtain plenty of food, for which my peace is
incomplete. I am sent by the snakes to fetch the excellent amrita. Indeed, I
shall fetch it today for emancipating my mother from her bondage. My
mother command me, saying, 'Eat thou the Nishadas.' I have eaten them by
thousands, but my hunger is not appeased. Therefore, O worshipful one,
point out to me some other food, by eating which, O master, I may be
strong enough to bring away amrita by force. Thou shouldst indicate some
food wherewith I may appease my hunger and thirst.'
"Kasyapa replied, 'This lake thou seest is sacred. It hath been heard, of even
in the heavens. There is an elephant, with face downwards, who continually
draggeth a tortoise, his elder brother. I shall speak to you in detail of their
hostility in former life. Just listen as I tell you why they are here.
"There was of old a great Rishi of the name of Vibhavasu. He was
exceedingly wrathful. He had a younger brother of the name of Supritika.
The latter was averse to keeping his wealth jointly with his brother's. And
Supritika would always speak of partition. After some time his brother
Vibhavasu told Supritika, 'It is from great foolishness that persons blinded
by love of wealth always desire to make a partition of their patrimony. After
effecting a partition they fight with each other, deluded by wealth. Then
again, enemies in the guise of friends cause estrangements between ignorant
and selfish men alter they become separated in wealth, and pointing out
faults confirm their quarrels, so that the latter soon fall one by one.
Absolute ruin very soon overtakes the separated. For these reasons the wise
never speak approvingly of partition amongst brothers who, when divided,
do not regard the most authoritative Sastras and live always in fear of each
other. But as thou, Supritika, without regarding my advice impelled by
desire of separation, always wishest to make an arrangement about your
property, thou shall become an elephant.' Supritika, thus cursed, then spake
unto Vibhavasu, 'Thou also shall become a tortoise moving in the midst of
the waters.'
"And thus on account of wealth those two fools, Supritika and Vibhavasu,
from each other's curse, have become an elephant and a tortoise
respectively. Owing to their wrath, they have both become inferior animals.
And they are engaged in hostilities with each other, proud of their excessive
strength and the weight of their bodies. And in this lake those two beings of
huge bodies are engaged in acts according to their former hostility. Look
here, one amongst them, the handsome elephant of huge body, is even now
approaching. Hearing his roar, the tortoise also of huge body, living within
the waters, cometh out, agitating the lake violently. And seeing him the
